School of Engineering
2.97, 2.971 Independent Activities
Prereq.: -
2.990-2.991 Advanced Topics in Fluid and
Thermal Sciences
U (IAP) Prereq.: 2.25, 2.451, 2.55
Units arranged G (Spring)
Can be repeated for credit 2-0-4 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit
For undergraduates desiring to carry on independent or group studies during the January Advanced subjects in transport phenomena
Independent Activities Period. Each student taught for six weeks. Spring 1997: Microscale
will carry on a program of his or her own choos- Laser Diagnostics and Processing. Principles
ing, either as an independent worker, or as a of laser-material interactions: electronic strucsmember of a team or class. Special lectures, tures of materials and light absorption/emisseminars, and laboratory projects arranged sion by gas molecules, small particles, and
when appropriate. Programs arranged on an solids. Microscale energy transfer in laser diagindividual basis in consultation with the instruc- nostics and processing. Optical detection and
tor. Credit arranged with D. Rowell. 2.971 is imaging. Applications of laser spectroscopy in
graded P/D/F. combustion, fluid flow, heat transfer, and bioengineering. Laser microfabrication. Extremes
of laser technology.
M. Johnson, T. Q. Qiu
Graduate Seminars in
2.993-2.995 Special Topics in Mechanical
Mechanical Engineering Engineering
Prereq.:
Check with our Department graduate office
prior to the beginning of each term for
other proposed listings.
2.981 Low-Temperature Refrigeration
Prereq.: 2.005
Acad Year 1996-97: G (Spring)
Acad Year 1997-98: Not offered
3-3-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Thermodynamic processes for producing lowtemperature refrigeration. Problems of heat exchangers, insulation, and rectification.
Applications of low-level refrigeration to liquefaction of helium and to application of superconductors. Laboratory projects on related
topics according to individual interests.
J. L. Smith, Jr.
2.982 Microscale Heat Transfer
Prereq.: 2.51 or equivalent
Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: G (Spring)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Sub-micron structures are the hallmark of
electronic and biological systems. Microscale
transport phenomena differ from those in the
macroscopic realm if a geometric dimension,
e.g., film thickness, becomes of the order of a
phenomenological length-scale, e.g., radiation
wavelength. This seminar introduces the breakdown limits of continuum analyses for radiation, conduction, convection, and phase
change heat transfer. Participants present
technical case studies in areas of their interest,
such as electronic packaging or biological tissues.
E. Cravalho
-
U (Fall, IAP, Spring, Summer)
Units arranged
Can be repeated for credit
For undergraduates desiring to carry on substantial projects of own choice, under faculty
supervision, in mechanical engineering. Work
may be of experimental, theoretical, or design
nature. Projects may be arranged individually
in most fields of department interest, i.e., in
mechanics and materials, thermal and fluid
sciences, systems and design, and biomedical
engineering.
Coordinator: D. Rowell.
2.996-2.998 Advanced Topics in
Mechanical Engineering
Prereq.: -
G (Fall, Spring, Summer)
Units arranged H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit
Assigned reading and special problems or research in special areas, either theoretical or experimental, or design. Arranged on individual
basis with instructor in the following areas:
mechanics and materials, thermal and fluid
sciences, systems and design, and biomedical
engineering. Coordinator: A. A. Sonin.
2.999 Engineer's Degree Thesis Proposal
Preparation
Prereq.: -
2.ThG Graduate Thesis
Prereq.:
G (Fall, Spring, Summer)
Units arranged H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit
For students who must do additional work to
convert an S.M. Thesis to an M.E. Thesis, or
for students who do an M.E. Thesis after
having received an S.M. degree.
A. A. Sonin
-
G (Fall, Spring, Summer)
Units arranged H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit
Program of graduate research, leading to the
writing of an S.M., Ph.D., or Sc.D. thesis; to be
arranged by the student and an appropriate
MIT faculty member.
Consult Department Headquarters.
2.THU Undergraduate Independent Study
or Thesis
Prereq.: -
U (Fall, Spring, Summer)
Units arranged
Can be repeated for credit
Individual self-motivated study, research, or
design project under faculty supervision.
Departmental program requirement: Minimum
of 6 units.
D. Rowell
324 Chapter Vill
