School of Engineering
3.34 High-Temperature Materials
Prereq.: 3.11 or 3.14 or equivalent
G (Spring)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Covers the relationship between deformation
mechanisms and microstructure for materials
used at elevated temperature. Mechanisms:
diffusional creep, dislocation creep, grainboundary sliding and superplasticity, fatigue,
fracture, environmental effects. Microstructure:
metals (iron-, cobalt-, nickel-, refractory- and intermetallic alloys), ceramics, composites
(metal-, ceramic- and carbon-matrix, coated
materials).
D. C. Dunand
3.35 Fracture and Fatigue
Prereq.: 2.30 or 3.11 or equivalent
G (Fall)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Linear elastic and elastic plastic fracture
mechanics. Experimental methods. Microstructural effects on fracture in metals, ceramics,
polymers, electronic materials, and composites. Toughening mechanisms. Crack
growth resistance and creep fracture. Interface
fracture mechanics. Fatigue damage and dislocation substructures in single crystals. Stressand strain-life approach to fatigue. Fatigue
crack growth models and mechanisms. Variable amplitude fatigue. Corrosion fatigue.
Case studies. Co-taught with Professor A. G.
Evans, Harvard University.
S. Suresh
3.36J Welding Engineering
(Same subject as 13.17J)
Prereq.: 13.15
G (Spring)
3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
See description under subject 13.17J.
K. Masubuchi
3.37 Welding and Joining Processes
Prereq.: -
3.39 Mechanical Properties of Materials 3.43 Electronic Materials and Devices
(Revised Content)
Prereq.: 3.20, 3.42
Prereq.: 2.30; 3.11 or 22.71J G (Fall)
G (Fall) 3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Detailed examination of the principal electricai,
Reviews elasticity theory. Elements of con- optical, and magnetic devices, e.g., p-n,
tinuum plasticity and dislocation plasticity. Schottky, MOS and heterojunctions, quantum
Strengthening mechanisms in metals. Basics wells, lasers, wave guides, detectors, solar
of viscoelasticity and creep. Applications of cells, magnetic memory devices, etc. Focus on
principles in linear elastic fracture mechanics materials selection, optimization and integrato brittle fracture and to fatigue crack propaga- tion. Discussion of new materials needs and altion. Micromechanisms of static and cyclic frac- ternative processing routes.
ture. Discusses case studies and reviews H. L. Tuller
current research in the mechanical behavior of
structural and device materials with examples 3.44 Electronic Materials Processing
in each class of materials: metals, ceramics,
polymers, thin films, and composites. Prereq.: 3.20, 3.21
D. C. Dunand, S. Suresh G (Fall)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
3.40J Physical Metallurgy Processing of electronic materials for device
and circuit applications. Detailed discussion of
(Same subject as 22.71J)
techniques and theory for growth of devicePrereq.: 3.14 or 3.711J
quality crystals. Processes for integrated cirG (Fall)
cuit fabrication including oxidation, junction
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
formation, and metallization. Emphasis on
Discusses structure-property relationships in relationships among processing, structure, ano
metallic alloys selected to illustrate some basic properties. Examples taken from materials
concepts of physical metallurgy and alloy processing for applications in VLSI, opdesign. Considers mostly mechanical proper- toelectronics, and multi-layer integration.
ties. Also considers structural features: struc- C. V. Thompson
tural stability, grain size, interstitial and
substitutional solutes, precipitates, second- 3.45 Magnetic Materials
phase particles, eutectics and eutectoids, and
composites. Prereq.: 3.41
R. W. Balluffi Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: G (Spring)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
3.41 Physics and Chemistry of Materials
Magnetization phenomena, origin of magPrereq.: 8.03, 18.03
netism in a material, magnetic domains and
G (Fall)
domain walls, magnetic anisotropy, reversible
4-0-8 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
and irreversible magnetization processes. SpeQuantum physics and chemistry and statistics cial topics: ferromagnetism of thin films and
of electrons, atoms, molecules, and solids. fine particles, magnetic recording, magnetic cirElectron structure of crystalline and amor- cuits, amorphous magnetic materials. Alterphous materials, defects, surfaces, and inter- nate years.
faces. Transport in metals, semiconductors, R. C. OHandley
and insulators - ideal and defective. Introduction to junction theory. Optical and dielectric 3.46 Optical and Optoelectronic
G (Fall, IAP, Spring, Summer) phenomena - absorption, emission, refrac- Materials
3-0-3 H-LEVEL Grad Credit tion. Magnetic phenomena - dia-, para-, and
Discusses a wide variety of processes and ferro-magnetism. Superconductivity. Implica- Prereq.: 3.42 or equivalent
materials from the viewpoint of their fundamen- tions for properties of interest. Acad Year 1996-97: G (Fall)
tal physical and chemical properties. Specific E. A. Fitzgerald Acad Year 1997-98: Not offered
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
topics: cold welding, adhesive bonding, diffusion bonding, soldering, brazing, flames, 3.42 Electronic Materials Design Optical and optoelectronic properties of semiarcs, high-energy density heat sources, conductors, ceramics, and polymers.
Prereq.: 3.41
solidification, cracking resistance, shielding Electronic structure, refractive index,
G (Spring)
methods, and electric contacts. Emphasis on electroluminescence, Kerr and Faraday ef-
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
underlying science of a given process rather fects, and laser phenomena. Materials design
than a detailed description of the technique or Extensive and intensive examination of struc- and processing for lasers, waveguides,
equipment. ture (crystalline, electronic, defect, and modulators, switches, and optoelectronic inT. W. Eagar microstructure)-processing-property correla- tegrated circuits. Alternate years.
tions for a wide range of materials including L. C. Kimerling
metals, semiconductors, dielectrics, optical,
magnetic, and superconducting materials. Emphasis on materials design in relation to fundamental device characteristics.
K. D. Kolenbrander, H. L. Tuller
328 Chapter VlI
