Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering Course 1
1.281 Transportation Economics Geoenvironmental and
Prereq.: 14.01 Geotechnical Engineering
G (Spring)
3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
1.30 Introduction to Geotechnical
Introduction to the economic analysis of Engineering
transportation markets: urban and intercity,
Prereq.: 1.04
passenger and freight, national and internationU (Fall)
al. Utility theory and its application to transport
3-2-7
demand. Production theory and the analysis of
transport costs. Market structures and Fundamentals of soil mechanics taught in contransport pricing. Externalities. Public goods. text of three to four design exercises. Phase
The role of government in regulating transport relationships; geostatic stresses: friction
and providing infrastructure. angles; Rankine and Coulomb earth presInformation: N. H. M. Wilson. sures; effective stress; Darcy's law; heads;
seepage force; flow nets; compression and
1.283J The Economics of Cities and swell of clays; consolidation and settlement;
Regions drained and undrained strength of simple clay;
effective and total stress paths. Design exer-
(Same subject as 14.573J, 11.41 0J) cises such as retaining walls with and without
Prereq.: 14.03 or 14.04 seepage, controlling settlements, and safe conG (Fall) struction of embankments.
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit P. J. Culligan-Hensley
See description under subject 14.573J.
W. Wheaton 1.32 Introduction to Engineering Geology
Prereq.:
1.284J Regional Economic Theories,
Accounts, and Techniques
(Same subject as 11.481 J)
Prereq.: 14.03, 14.04
G (Spring)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
See description under subject 11.481J.
K. R. Polenske
1.285J Regional Socioeconomic Impact
Analyses and Modeling
(Same subject as 11.482J)
Prereq.: 11.481J or permission of instructor
G (Fall)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
See description under subject 11.482J.
K. R. Polenske
1.286 Freight Transportation
Management
Prereq.: 1.201, 1.03
Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: G (Spring)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Methods for analysis of freight systems, with
emphasis on rail and motor carrier operations
and management of carrier assets. Study of
competitive transportation companies and the
environment in which they operate. Market issues, organizational structure, information systems, and decisionmaking processes for fleet
management, facility operations, maintenance,
and operations/service planning. Case studies
illustrate effects of regulation, technology,
labor relations, and competition on carrier
strategies. Alternate years.
C. D. Martland
-
1.34 Waste Containment and Remediation
Technology
Prereq.: 1 .30, permission of instructor
G (Spring)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Focuses on the geotechnical aspects of hazardous waste management, with specific emphasis on the design of land-based waste
containment structures and hazardous waste
remediation. Introduction to hazardous waste;
definition of hazardous waste, regulatory requirements, waste characteristics,
geochemistry, and contaminant transport. The
design and operation of waste containment
structures; landfills, impoundments, and minewaste disposal. The characterization and
remediation of contaminated sites: the superfund law, preliminary site assessment, site investigation techniques, and remediation
technologies. Monitoring requirements.
P. J. Culligan-Hensley
1.351 Theoretical Soil Mechanics
Prereq.: 1.361
Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
U (Spring) Acad Year 1997-98: G (Spring)
3-3-6 REST 3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Basic principles of physical geology, emphasiz- Presentation of fundamental theories in soil
ing topics pertinent to environmental and civil mechanics: field equations of linear elasticity,
engineering. Identification of minerals; ig- solutions of boundary value problems. Introneous, metamorphic, and sedimentary rocks. duction to finite element method. Steady and
Alluvial, glacial, eolian, lacustrine, marine, and transient flow in porous media; applications in
colluvial sediments. Weathering. Faults and confined and unconfined seepage, one dimenfractures. Air photos and geologic maps. Field sional consolidation. Introduction to poro-elastrips. Term paper; can be used for Phase 2 of ticity. Yielding and failure of soils, plasticity
the Writing Requirement. theory and limit analyses; with examples for
H. H. Einstein bearing capacity and slope stability. Cam Clay
models and critical state theory of soil behavior.
A. J. Whittle
1.322 Soil Behavior
Prereq.: 1.361 1.361 Advanced Soil Mechanics
Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: G (Spring) Prereq.: 1.30
3-1-8 H-LEVEL Grad Credit G (Fall)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Detailed study of soil properties with emphasis
on interpretation of field and laboratory test Consideration of the following fundamentals of
data and their use in soft-ground construction soil mechanics: the nature of soil; the effective
engineering. Includes: consolidation and stress principle; permeability and seepage;
secondary compression; basic strength prin- stress-strain-strength behavior of cohesionless
ciples; stress-strain strength behavior of clays, and cohesive soil; lateral earth stresses; bearemphasizing effects of sample disturbance, ing capacity and slope stability; consolidation
anisotropy and strain rate; strength and com- theory; settlement analyses. Core requirement
pression of granular soils; engineering proper- for Geoenvironmental M.Eng. program.
ties of compacted soils. Some knowledge of C. C. Ladd
field and laboratory testing assumed; 1.37
desirable. Alternate years. 1.364 Advanced Geotechnical Engineering
C. C. Ladd Prereq.: 1.30, 1.361
G (Fall)
1.331 Soil Dynamics 3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Prereq.: 1.361
Site characterization and geotechnical aspects G (Spring)
of the design and construction of foundation
3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
systems. Topics include site investigation (with
Stress-strain behavior during transient and emphasis on in situ testing), shallow (footings
repeated loadings, relation to wave velocity. and raftings) and deep (piles and caissons)
Strength degradation and liquefaction. foundations, excavation support systems,
Analysis of foundations subjected to dynamic groundwater control, slope stability, soil imloadings; effect of soils upon seismic motions; provement (compaction, soil reinforcement,
earth dams and retaining walls during etc.), and construction monitoring. Core reearthquakes; other selected applications. Alter- quirement for Geoenvironmental M.Eng. pronate years. gram.
Staff A. J. Whittle
Descriptions of Subjects 305
