Department of Mechanical Engineering Course 2
Thermodynamics and Heat and Mass Transfer
Statistical Mechanics
2.51 Heat and Mass Transfer Engineering
2.41J Thermal Power Engineering Prereq.: 2.006
U (Fall, Spring)
(Same subject as 13.25J)
3-0-9
Prereq.: 2.005
U (Spring) Analysis, modeling, and design of heat and
3-0-9 mass transfer processes in manufacturing,
machinery, energy production, and energy
Examines current and future thermal power
management technologies. Heat conduction in
systems. Introduction to combustion and the solids: steady and transient states, finned surdesign of turbomachinery. Analyses of various faces, numerical simulation tools. Heat transfer
power plants including Rankine, Brayton, Otto,
associated with laminar and turbulent flow of
Diesel, and refrigerating systems. Applications fluids in free and forced convection. Heat trans- include land-based and marine power plants.
fer in boiling and condensation. Heat exConsideration of pollution and environmental
changer design, including enhanced surface
issues.
selection and pressure loss evaluation. Mass
E. G. Cravalho, A. D. Carmichael
transfer at low rates: evaporation, wet-bulb
temperature, catalysis. Students complete a
2.45J Fundamentals of Energy in Buildings creative design project on a problem taken
(Same subject as 4.42J, 1.42J) from industry. Elective unit distribution: AdPrereq.: 8.02, 18.02 vanced disciplinary, 9; Design, 3.
U (Fall) J. H. Lienhard, L. R. Glicksman, B. B. Mikic
3-0-9 REST
2.54 Heat Transfer
See description under subject 4.42J.
L. R. Glicksman Prereq.:
2.451J General Thermodynamics
(Same subject as 22.571J)
Prereq.: Permission of instructor
G (Fall)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
General foundations of thermodynamics valid
for small and large systems, and equilibrium
and nonequilibrium states. Definitions of work,
energy, stable equilibrium, available energy,
entropy, thermodynamic potential, and interactions other than work (nonwork, heat, mass
transfer). Applications to properties of
materials, bulk flow, energy conversion, chemical equilibrium, combustion, and industrial
manufacturing.
J. L. Smith
2.46J Analysis and Design of Heating,
Ventilating, and Air Conditioning Systems
(New)
(Same subject as 4.427J)
Prereq.: 2.005, 2.51
G (Fall)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Explores the fundamentals of heating, ventilating, and air-conditioning (HVAC) systems. Discussion of psychrometrics, air conditioning
processes, thermal comfort, indoor air quality
and outdoor design conditions; concentration
on the calculation of heating and cooling load
in order to size suitable HVAC equipment; estimation of energy consumption of the HVAC
equipment. Introduces both manual and computer methods. One site visit.
Q. Chen
-
2.58J Radiative Transfer
(Revised Units)
(Same subject as 10.74J)
Prereq.: 10.302 or 2.51
Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: G (Spring)
2-0-4 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Principles of thermal radiations and their application to engineering heat transfer
problems. Basic laws of thermal radiation.
Radiative properties of surfaces. Radiant interchange among surfaces separated by a
transparent medium. Thermal radiation characteristics of gases and particle clouds. Radiative
interchange through absorbing, emitting, and
scattering media. Application to furnaces, hightemperature processing, pyrometry, insulation,
and solar energy.
L. R. Glicksman, A. F. Sarofim
Power Systems
2.601J Design of Thermal Power
Systems
G (Spring)
(Same subject as 13.26J)
3-0-3 Prereq.: 2.005, 2.006, 2.51
Fundamentals of conduction, radiation of heat, G (Spring)
and effects of convection, with applications to 3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
problems arising in practice. Primarily for Design of thermal power system components
selected officers of US Navy and Coast Guard. and system optimization. Reviews gas
B. B. Mikid
dynamics and heat transfer. Design of axial
and centrifugal compressors, and axial and
2.55 Advanced Heat and Mass Transfer
radial inflow turbines, heat exchangers,
Prereq.: 2.51 evaporators, boilers, and condensers. Takes
G (Spring) design project examples from the fields of
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit space, electrical utilities, and marine power
systems. Assumes knowledge of elementary
Advanced treatment of fundamental aspects of heat transfer and simple power cycles.
heat and mass transport. Topics covered inL. R. Glicksman, A. D. Carmichael
clude: diffusion kinetics, conservation laws,
some heat conduction, laminar and turbulent
2.615 Internal Combustion Engines
convection, mass transfer including phase
change or heterogeneous reactions, and basic Prereq.: 2.005, 2.006
thermal radiation. Problems and examples in- G (Spring)
clude theory and applications drawn from a 3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
spectrum of engineering design and manufacFundamentals of how the design and operaturing problems. tion of internal combustion engines affect their
J. H. Lienhard, B. B. Mikid performance and fuel requirements. Study of
fuid flow, thermodynamics, combustion, heat
2.56 Conduction and Change of Phase Heat transfer and friction phenomena, and fuel
Transfer
properties, relevant to engine power, efficienPrereq.: 2.51, 18.075 cy, and emissions. Examination of design feaG (Fall) tures and operating characteristics of different
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit types of engines: spark-ignition, diesel,
stratified-charge, and mixed-cycle engines. EnSolutions of steady and transient heat conduc- gine Laboratory project. For graduate and
tion problems in orthogonal coordinate sys- senior undergraduate students.
tems with various boundary conditions. J. B. Heywood
Approximate methods: application of numerical techniques. Moving boundaries: problems
in freezing and melting. Condensation heat
transfer. Boiling: mechanisms and heat transfer correlations. Thermal modeling of engineering systems: use of laser in material removal
and processing.
B. B. Mikid
Descriptions of Subjects 319
