Department of Materials Science and Engineering Course 3
3.15 Electrical, Optical, and Magnetic
Materials and Devices
Prereq.: 3.10
U (Fall)
4-0-8
Explores the relationships which exist between
the performance of electrical, optical, and magnetic devices and the microstructural characteristics of the materials from which they are
constructed. Features a device-motivated approach which places strong emphasis on
emerging technologies. Device applications of
physical phenomena are considered, including
electrical conductivity and doping, photodetection, photoluminescence and electroluminescence, light amplification, nonlinear optics and
optical switching, ferroelectricity, and ferromagnetism.
K. D. Kolenbrander
3.155J Microelectronics Processing
Technology
(Same subject as 6.152J, 10.480J)
Prereq.: Permission of instructor
U (Fall, Spring)
3-4-5
See description under subject 6.152J.
L. C. Kimerling, C. V. Thompson, H. H. Sawin,
M. A. Schmidt, C. G. Sodini, K. K. Gleason
3.172 Inventions and Patents
Prereq.: 14.02
U (Fall)
3-0-6
Engineering School-Wide Elective Subject.
Description given at end of this chapter in
SWE section on page 562.
R. H. Rines
3.185 Transport Phenomena in Materials
Engineering
Prereq.: 3.01, 18.03
U (Fall)
4-0-8
Definition of viscosity, simple overall mechanical energy balances, elements of laminar flow
and turbulent flow. Thermal conductivity,
steady and unsteady conduction problems,
forced and natural convection, heat transfer
coefficient, and radiative heat transfer. Definition of binary diffusivity, convection mass transfer, and mass transfer coefficient. Illustrative
examples given throughout, chosen from the
materials processing field.
M. C. Flemings
3.ThG Graduate Thesis
Prereq.: -
3.20 Thermodynamics of Materials 3.30 Electron Microscopy: Image
Interpretation
Prereq.: 3.00, 3.01, or permission of instructor
G (Fall) Prereq.: 3.081, 3.13
4-0-8 H-LEVEL Grad Credit Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: G (Fall)
Offers advanced treatment of thermodynamic
3-2-7 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
properties of inorganic materials, including introductory statistical thermodynamics and sur- Derives relationship between detail in transmisface thermodynamics. Applies laws of sion electron microscopy images and internal
thermodynamics to chemical behavior of ele- structure of an object to the atomic level.
ments, compounds, and solutions. Discusses Fourier theory of diffraction. Lens action, aberheterogeneous equilibria, chemical reactions, rations, and transfer functions. Elastic and inand thermodynamics of interfaces and struc- elastic interaction of electrons with atoms.
tural defects. Kinematical and dynamical theories of electron
K. C. Russell diffraction. Phase object approximations and
high-resolution imaging methods. Imaging of
3.21 Kinetic Processes in Materials defects with displacement and replacement
fields. Laboratory sessions. Alternate years.
Prereq.: 3.00, 3.01, 3.185, or permission of in- L. W. Hobbs
structor
G (Spring)
3.31 Phase Transformations
4-0-8 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Prereq.: 3.20, 3.21
Presents unified treatment of kinetics from
G (Spring)
phenomenological and atomistic viewpoints.
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Covers diffusion in metals and non-metals,
chemical kinetics, and kinetics of phase trans- Advanced treatment of phase transformations
formations, including nucleation, growth, coar- in solids. Homogeneous and heterogeneous
sening, and spinodal decomposition. Also nucleation. Theories of thermally activated
includes non-catalytic gas-solid reactions and growth processes and morphological stability.
oxidation of metals and alloys. Transformation by spinodal decomposition and
S. M Allen, R. W. Balluffi continuous ordering. Transformation
mechanisms in systems with multicritical
3.271 Structure of Materials points. Eutectoidal transformations and cellular
precipitation. Crystallographic theory and
Prereq.: 18.03, 3.10 mechanisms of martensitic transformations.
G (Spring) R. M. Rose
4-0-8 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Quantitative description of atomic arrange- 3.320 Atomistic Computer Modeling of
ments in selected metals, oxides, and silicates Materials
important in materials science. Interprets strucPrereq.: 3.20, 3.13, or permission of instructor
tures in terms of coordination polyhedra and
G (Spring)
packing. Relationships between structures:
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
polymorphism, polytypism, and derivative structures. Describes diffraction using Fourier trans- Atomistic computer modeling as a tool to solve
forms and series. Determines structure problems in materials science and engineerthrough diffraction effects: the phase problem, ing. Deterministic and stochastic methods.
Patterson function, and direct methods for Monte Carlo and molecular dynamics. Energy
phase determination. models (classical and quantum-mechanical).
B. J. Wuensch Free energy computation. Phase transformations. Metastability. Order-disorder transforma-
3.29 Special Problems in Materials tions. Defect properties. Transport properties.
Science Emphasis on solving relevant problems in a
variety of materials classes.
Prereq.: Permission of instructor G. Ceder
G (Fall, lAP, Spring, Summer)
Units arranged H-LEVEL Grad Credit
3.33 Defects in Crystals
Can be repeated for credit
Prereq.: 3.13, 3.14
3.291 Special Problems in Materials
G (Spring)
Science
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Prereq.: Permission of instructor
Unified treatment of point, line, and planar G (Fall, IAP, Spring, Summer)
defects in crystals. Point defects include vacanUnits arranged [P/D/F] H-LEVEL Grad Credit cies, self-interstitials, and solute atoms. Line
G (Fall, Spring, Summer) Can be repeated for credit defects include dislocations. Planar defects inUnits arranged H-LEVEL Grad Credit Advanced work in the field for qualified stu- clude stacking faults, small- and large-angle
Can be repeated for credit
dents. Lectures, conferences, assigned read- grain boundaries, and interphase boundaries.
Program of graduate research, leading to the ings, or supervised laboratory work. Discusses geometrical structure and physical
writing of an S.M., Ph.D., or Sc.D. thesis; to be R. M. Rose properties such as stress fields, energies, and
arranged by the student and an appropriate mobilities. Treats interactions between defects
MIT faculty member. including point defect clustering, point defectConsult L. W. Hobbs in Room 8-303. dislocation pinning, dislocation climb, and
grain boundaries as point defect sources/sinks.
R. W. Balluffi
Descriptions of Subjects 327
