School of Engineering
2.274 Computational Fluid Dynamics Materials 2.305 Advanced Mechanical Behavior of
Materials
Prereq.: Permission of instructor
Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered (See also listings under Polymers and Prereq.: 2.001, 3.091
Acad Year 1997-98: G (Fall) Fibers.) G (Fall)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit 3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Modern treatment of finite element methods 2.30 Mechanical Behavior of Materials Fundamentals of the mechanical behavior of
for incompressible viscous fluid flows. Formula- (Revised Units) engineering materials and their uses in struction, theoretical analysis, implementation, and tural and design-related applications is
application of discretizations and direct/itera- Prereq.: 2.001 presented, starting from a mechanistic point of
tive solvers for elliptic, Stokes, convection-dif- U (Fall) view to arrive at phenomenological forms of
fusion, and Navier-Stokes equations. 3-2-10 constitutive behavior for deformation and fracFinite-difference/finite-element treatment of Introduces mechanical behavior of engineering ture. Problems involving elasticity, plasticity,
mixed initial/boundary value problems. Com- materials, and the use of materials in mechani- creep, visco-elasticity, and monotonic and
puter assignments requiring programming. cal design. Emphasizes both the fundamentals cyclic fracture are discussed, including applicaA. T. Patera of mechanical behavior of materials as well as tions to material processing.
design with materials. Major topics: elasticity, A. S. Argon, M. C. Boyce
2.277 Biomedical Fluid Mechanics plasticity, limit analysis, fatigue, fracture, and
composites. Materials selection. Laboratory ex- 2.306 Dislocations and Mechanical
Prereq.: 2.006
periments involving projects related to Properties of Crystalline Solids
G (Spring)
materials in mechanical design. Limited enroll-
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit Prereq.: 2.30 or 2.002, 3.091
ment.
Acad Year 1996-97: G (Fall)
Engineering approach to the function of cir- L. Anand, D. M. Parks, M. C. Boyce
Acad Year 1997-98: Not offered
culatory and respiratory systems and to other
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
problems in physiology involving fluid 2.302 Physics of Inelastic Deformation of
dynamics. Reviews relevant anatomy and Solids Derivation of properties of both straight and
physiology emphasizing quantitative considera- curved dislocations from elasticity. Interaction
tions. Presents and discusses mathematical or Prereq.: 2.30 or 2.002 or 2.305 of dislocations with external stresses, with
engineering models in relation to physiological Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered each other, with free surfaces, interfaces, and
phenomena they are intended to simulate. Acad Year 1997-98: G (Spring) cracks. Dislocations in specific crystal strucDirected to graduate students in engineering 3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit tures: stress fields, line energies, line tension.
and science, but open to medical students and Rate mechanisms in crystal plasticity, kinetics Kinematics of dislocation glide and climb.
undergraduates with the permission of the in- and dynamics of slip, superposition of flow Dynamics of moving dislocations. Interaction
structor. stress mechanisms. Inelastic deformation in of dislocations with point defects and climb.
C. F Dewey, R. D. Kamm non-metals, visco-plasticity of metallic, inor- Dislocation multiplication. Athermal
ganic, and polymeric glasses; plasticity of crys- mechanisms of strain hardening in both
2.280 Fundamentals and Modeling in talline polymers; statistical theory of homogeneous and heterogeneous crystals.
Combustion elastomeric behavior. Macro-plasticity in A. S. Argon
polycrystalline metals and in polymers. Strain
Prereq.: 2.005, 2.006
hardening and recovery. Macroscopic three- 2.31 Finite Element Analysis in Computer
Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
dimensional constitutive relations for inelastic Aided Mechanical Design
Acad Year 1997-98: G (Spring)
deformation usable in computational (New)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
mechanics. Alternate years.
Prereq.: 2.001, 2.002
Fundamentals and modeling of physical gas A. S. Argon
U (Spring)
dynamics and combustion using analytical and
3-3-6
numerical methods. Conservation equations of 2.303 Micro Mechanisms of Fracture
reacting flows. Chemical thermodynamics and Focuses on the role of finite element analysis
kinetics. Non-equilibrium flow. Detonation and Prereq.: 2.30 or 2.002 or 2.305 in computer aided mechanical design. Introducboundary layers. Ignition, flammability, and ex- Acad Year 1996-97: G (Spring) tion to the finite element method for problems
tinction. Premixed and diffusion flames. Com- Acad Year 1997-98: Not offered involving elastic, thermo-elastic, and elasticbustion instabilities. Supersonic combustion. 3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit plastic material behavior together with stiffTurbulent combustion. Fire, safety, and en- Fundamental crack tip solutions. Cohesive ness, strength and toughness-related material
vironmental impact. strength of pure solids and interfaces. Micro- properties which limit mechanical design. ApA. F Ghoniem crack initiation. Brittle fracture in tension and proximations inherent in numerical analyses
compression. Static fatigue. Toughening of brit- discussed and the physical interpretations of
2.29J Air Pollution Control tle solids by crack tip shielding and trapping or the results emphasized. Projects emphasize
bridging. Ductile fracture by plastic cavitation. the various iterative loops between the dif-
(Same subject as 10.571J) Intergranular fracture at elevated tempera- ferent phases of the "design/analysis/manufacPrereq.: Permission of instructor tures. Brittle to ductile transitions in fracture. ture/test" philosophy of mechanical design.
G (Spring) Fracture under cyclic loading. Fracture of com- Elective unit distribution: Advanced discipli-
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit posites. Fracture along interfaces. Examples nary, 6; Design, 3; Lab, 3.
See description under subject 10.571J. drawn from all prominent structural solids. Al- M. C. Boyce, L. Anand, D. M. Parks
G. J. McRae ternate years.
A. S. Argon
318 Chapter Vill
