School of Engineering
3.069 Ceramics Processing
Prereq.: 3.185
U (Spring)
3-0-9
In-depth study of the unit operations in
processing technical ceramics and the effect of
these operations on the properties of the
sintered material. Topics include powder
production and conditioning, drying, forming,
sintering, and microstructure development.
Relevant aspects of transport phenomena, colloid science, and chemistry are discussed, as
well as contemporary issues in ceramic composite processing. Case studies involving both
electronic and structural ceramics are
reviewed.
M. J. Cima
3.07 Introduction to Ceramics
Prereq.: 3.01, 3.13
U (Fall)
4-0-8
Discusses structure-property relationships in
ceramic materials. Includes hierarchy of structures from the atomic to microstructural levels.
Defects, atom mobility, solid-state
electrochemical processes, phase equilibria,
and phase transformations are discussed in
the context of controlling properties for structural and electronic applications of ceramics.
Numerous examples from current technology.
Y.-M. Chiang
3.070J Materials for Nuclear Applications
(Subject meets with 22.70J, 3.711J, 22.070J)
Prereq.: 3.091
U (Spring)
3-0-9
See description under subject 22.70J.
K. C. Russell
3.08J Industrial Competition in the US and
Asia
(Same subject as 21H.541J, TPP.03J)
Prereq.: -
3.081 Materials Structure Laboratory
Prereq.: 3.13 or permission of instructor
U (Fall, Spring)
1-6-5 Institute LAB
Structure, structural transitions, and their influence on materials properties are examined
by classical characterization methods (optical
and electron microscopy, X-ray diffraction, UV
and IR spectroscopy, TGA, DSC) and by more
recently developed tools (AFM, Auger
spectroscopy, molecular simulation). Investigations address four central themes: electronic
and chemical structure, order and disorder, surfaces and interfaces, nucleation and growth.
Unknown materials determination and
materials design for the environment.
Fall Term: A. M. Mayes
Spring Term: L. W. Hobbs
3.082 Materials Processing Laboratory
Prereq.: 3.01, 3.081, 3.13
U (Fall, Spring)
1-6-5
A unified laboratory teaching students how to
tailor the properties and performance of a
material by modifications in its composition
and microstructure through synthesis and
processing. Students process materials from
different classes (metals, ceramics, polymers,
and electronic materials). Design is an integral
part of this subject, which consists of two sixweek project modules. Examples include
solidification processing, powder processing,
and thin-film processing of materials for magnetic, electronic, optical, and structural applications.
Y.-M. Chiang, D. C. Dunand, J. S. Haggerty,
M. F. Rubner, C. E. Scott
3.091 Introduction to Solid-State Chemistry
Prereq.:
Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: U (Spring)
2-0-7 HASS
Examines causes of economic efficiency and
international competitiveness in the US and
Asia, considering relative importance of technological, economical, social, and historical factors. Countries discussed include modern
China (mainland, Taiwan, and Hong Kong),
South Korea, and Japan. Topics include costs
of production, product quality, organizational
structures, labor relations, and the educational
system. Case studies of selected industries
such as automotive, steel, electronics, computers, and biotechnology.
J. P. Clark, P. C. Perdue
-
U (Fall, Spring)
5-0-7 CHEMISTRY
Introduction to the basic principles of chemistry
and their application to the solid state.
Development of relationships between
electronic structure of elements, chemical
bonding, and crystal structure. Characterization of atomic and molecular arrangements in crystalline and amorphous solids.
Chemical kinetics. Phase diagrams. Examples
from contemporary industrial pratice (including
the environmental impacts of processes and
products) and from emerging technologies,
e.g., biomaterials.
Fall Term: D. R. Sadoway
Spring Term: R. M. Latanision
3.092 Perspectives in Materials Science
Prereq.: -
3.093 Hotter, Faster, Stronger, Cheaper:
Materials at the Frontiers of Engineering
Prereq.:
U (Spring)
2-0-4 [P/D/F]
Surveys, in some depth, materials science and
its applications at levels suitable for those with
no prior experience in the field. Lectures by
MIT staff and guests form a series of integrated seminars on important aspects of the
field.
A. F. Witt
-
U (IAP)
1-0-2 [P/D/F]
Illustrates the physical and economic limits to
performance of engineering systems imposed
by properties and costs of currently available
materials in a series of case-study lectures by
MIT staff and guests. Explores how and why
materials behave as they do, as well as
prospects and opportunities for the development of new materials. Suitable for those with
no prior experience in materials science.
J. P. Clark
3.10 Chemical Physics of Materials
Prereq.: 3.091 or 5.11; 8.02, 18.03
U (Spring)
4-0-8 REST
Introduction to the physics of the chemical
bond in molecules and solids; electrons and
energy bands in solids; electrical, optical, magnetic, and thermal properties.
E. A. Fitzgerald, J. D. Livingston
3.11 Mechanics of Materials
Prereq.: 3.01, 3.13
U (Spring)
4-0-8
Overview of mechanical properties of
ceramics, metals, and polymers, emphasizing
the role of processing and microstructure in
controlling these properties. Introduction to
continuum concepts of stress and strain, and
design of engineering structures from a
materials point of view.
S. Suresh, D. K. Roylance
3.13 Structure of Materials
Prereq.: 3.091 or 5.11; 8.02, 18.02
U (Fall)
4-0-8 REST
Provides fundamental basis for understanding
structure and its relationship to physical properties. Symmetry theory for the description of the
atomic and molecular arrangements in crystals. Principles of space groups and use of International Tables for Crystallography for
specifying crystal structure. Point, line, and
planar imperfections in ordered media. Quantitative description of noncrystalline materials.
Liquid crystals. Fractals. Structural hierarchies.
Influence of processing on microstructure;
structure-property relations.
S. M. Allen, E. L. Thomas
3.14 Physical Metallurgy
Prereq.: 3.01; 3.11; 3.13
U (Fall)
3-0-9
Treats phase transformation and strengthening mechanisms in metals and alloys. Also
provides an introduction to processing, microstructures, and properties of alloy systems of
major engineering significance.
A. Mortensen
326 Chapter VIII
