School of Engineering
1.366 Geotechnical Engineering 1.383 Underground Construction
Prereq.: 1.30 Prereq.: 1.361, 1.38, or permission of
G (Fall) instructor
3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: G (Spring)
Identification, presentation, and illustration of
3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
principles of soil mechanics. Considers the following topics: the nature of soil; the effective Familiarization with the most important aspects
stress principle; permeability and seepage; of planning, design, and construction of understress-strain-strength behavior of soil; lateral ground openings in soft ground and rock.
earth stresses. Applies principles to stability Detailed engineering analysis and design.
and deformation problems. Restricted to Major aspects of construction techniques and
graduate students not specializing in Geotech- construction planning. General planning and
nical Engineering. Same lectures as for 1.361. economic problems. Major design project. AlC. C. Ladd ternate years.
H. H. Einstein
1.37 Geotechnical Measurements and
Exploration 1.39 Studies in Geotechnical
Engineering
Prereq.: 1.30
G (Fall) Prereq.: Permission of instructor
3-4-2 H-LEVEL Grad Credit G (Fall, Spring, Summer)
Units arranged H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Application of testing principles to the measureCan be repeated for credit
ment of fundamental aspects of soil behavior
from classification to engineering properties. For graduate students desiring further inEmphasis on rigorous techniques to measure dividual study of special topics.
mechanical behavior under various boundary Information: C. C. Ladd.
conditions. Exposure to error estimation, research devices, geotechnical field exploration,
and in situ testing. Experiments include data
analysis, evaluation, and presentation.
J. T. Germaine
Construction Engineering and
Management 1.38 Engineering Geology
Prereq.: 1.30, 1.32, or permission of instructor
G (Fall) 1.40 Project Management
3-1-8 H-LEVEL Grad Credit Prereq.:
Effect of geologic features and processes on
constructed facilities; interaction between manmade structures and human activities in
general, and the geologic environment. Planning of subsurface exploration. Engineering
geologic characterization of soil and rock, including joint surveys and aspects of sedimented and residual soils. Laboratory on basic
geologic identification and mapping techniques. Extensive reading of case histories. Occasional field trips.
H. H. Einstein
1.381 Rock Mechanics
Prereq.: 1.38, 1.361
Acad Year 1996-97: G (Spring)
Acad Year 1997-98: Not offered
3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Introduces theoretical and experimental
aspects of rock mechanics and on this basis
prepares the student for rock engineering. Includes laboratory and field testing; empirical
and analytical methods for describing strength,
deformability, and permeability of intact rock
and rock masses; fracture mechanics and
mechanics of discontinua including flow
through discontinua; design and analysis of
rock slopes and foundations on rock; discussion of blasting design. Alternate years.
H. H. Einstein
-
1.420 Innovation in Construction
(New)
Prereq.: Permission of instructor
G (Spring)
3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Examines the current rate of innovation in the
construction industry. Constant technological
advances in materials, equipment, components, and methods are changing the nature
of construction and the completed facilities. Explores these innovations and their effects on
the building process. Considers application ot
general innovation theories to the construction
industry. Identifies probable sources of construction innovation, such as suppliers,
manufacturers, builders, and occupants.
Regional differences in design requirements,
means and methods, usage patterns also influence innovation development and use.
E. S. Slaughter
1.431 Structuring Construction Industry
Organizations
Prereq.:
U (Fall)
3-0-9
Overview of construction industry, its organizations and interactions. Project and construction
management methodologies presented for
project and company planning, control, and
decision-making. Includes scheduling, estimating, resource planning, organization structuring
used throughout all phases of expected life of
facility.
E. S. Slaughter
1.42J Fundamentals of Energy in Buildings
(Same subject as 4.42J, 2.45J)
Prereq.: 8.02, 18.02
U (Fall)
3-0-9 REST
See description under subject 4.42J.
L. R. Glicksman
-
G (Fall)
3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Examination, from a socio-technical perspective, of the organizations and organizational
processes underlying the development, construction, and operation of the buildings.
Studies the structure and functioning of firms,
sub-units of firms, and conglomerations ot
firms with regard to the influence of a wide
range of factors including strategy, human and
other resources, and role in the project
development process. Frameworks for observation, description, analysis, and design of individual enterprises presented and applied to
real-world situations.
H. G. lrwig
1.432J Project Control
(Revised Content)
(Same subject as 13.615J)
Prereq.: Permission of instructor
G (Fall)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Concepts, techniques, and information systems for planning, control, and management of
large-scale engineering projects. Performance
and control using estimating, scheduling, and
financial data. Network-based planning and
time control including CPM, PERT, and
resource constrained schedule. Integration of
cost and time control. Integration of project
control with strategic plan and information systems. Examines how new information can be
used for managing change. Considers the
complexity of distributed decision making
through workflow management. Covers the
use of various commercial software.
F. Penia-Mora
306 Chapter Vill
