Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering Course 1
1.44 Law and the Construction Industry
Prereq.: -
G (Fall)
2-0-7 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Practical focus on key legal principles applicable to construction. Provides sufficient understanding to manage legal aspects, instead
of being managed by them. Contractual
relationships, contract performance, avoiding/resolving disputes, designing procurement
systems, and legal aspects of contract
strategies. Case study applications. Topics include forms of organization, changes, differing
site conditions, designer liability, risk management, public construction, surety bonds, liens,
E&O insurance, site safety, arbitration, ADR,
partnering. Invited industry speakers, in-class
arbitration.
J. B. Miller
1.441 Public Infrastructure Development
Systems
(New)
Prereq.: 1.44 or permission of instructor
G (Spring)
3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Examination of new procurement and project
management strategies based on financeable
advances in technology from the private sector. Design of project delivery systems to create and encourage viable projects, new
technology, private sector capital investment,
competition, and best value. Systematic
analysis for aligning technology, revenue, and
financing opportunities with public infrastructure funding and needs. Case study development for air traffic control, waste water
treatment, automatic toll collection, and multimodal port development. Invited industry
speakers.
J. B. Miller
1.45 Construction Finance
Prereq.: -
1.46 Strategic Management in the Design
and Construction Value Chain
Prereq.: Permission of instructor
G (Spring)
2-0-7 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Examines the fundamental concepts of
strategic planning and management in the context of the engineering and construction industry. Discusses the basic business
relationships among firms in the design and
construction value chain. Specific topics include: industry analysis; strategic planning
models; human resource strategy; technology
strategy; strategy in fragmented industries;
and resource allocation. Case method of instruction is used, supplemented by extensive
readings.
J. Macomber
1.461 Corporate Organization For the Future
Prereq.: Permission of instructor
G (Spring)
2-0-4 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Exploration of emerging trends which are
changing the nature of the engineering and
construction market and the implications of
these changes on corporate organization and
management in the engineering and construction industry. Case study of an actual corporate reorganization is used to illustrate and
analyze: strategic management documents;
growth strategies; executive level management roles and responsibilities; and critical
operational and financial control requirements.
R. W. Page
1.462 Marketing Client-Oriented Services
Prereq.: Permission of instructor
G (Fall)
2-0-4 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Investigates the design, construction and
management needs of building sector clients
in the 1990s. The basic strategic marketing
program, its interrelationship with the
G (Fall)
remainder of the organization, and its essential
3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
role in the design and construction industry are
Examination of financing methods and struc- discussed. Subject includes guest lectures by
ture, project financial evaluation, and financial construction owners, designers, and contracmanagement in the domestic and international tors and a team project to develop business
construction industry. Analytical concepts and and marketing plans for providing and immethodologies from modern finance theory plementing services in various project stages.
and practice presented in lecture/discussions J. F. Kennedy
and applied to case analyses including
problems in cash flow analysis, corporate finan- 1.471 Management of Large-Scale Systems
cial structure, project finance, and foreign exchange exposure. Innovative financial Prereq.:
securities, such as options, and methods such
as privatization and sale-leaseback are examined. Prior subjects in microeconomics, accounting, and/or corporate finance desirable
but not required.
M. V. Samii
-
1.472 Innovative Contract Strategies in the
Public and Private Sectors
Prereq.: Permission of instructor
G (Spring)
2-0-4 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Examines the compatibility of various construction contracting methods, consisting of organizations, contracts, and award methods,
with certain types of projects and owners. Six
methods are examined: (1) traditional general
contracting; (2) construction management; (3)
multiple primes; (4) design-build; (5) turnkey;
and (6) build-operate-transfer. Subject includes lectures, case studies, guest speakers,
and a team project to analyze an actual case
example.
C. M. Gordon
1.481 Research Seminar in Construction
Engineering and Management
Prereq.:
G (Spring)
2-0-4
Provides an overview of current practices and
methods for managing the engineering,
procurement and construction of large-scale infrastructure project. Each year an engineering
firm, construction firm, government owner, or
private owner is invited to present a series of
lectures on actual case examples. For the past
several years, Boston's Central Artery/Tunnel
Project has been the topic of the subject.
Information: C. H. Helliwell.
-
G (Fall, Spring)
1-0-2 [P/D/F]
Can be repeated for credit
Seminar intended mainly for master's and doctoral candidates in the Center for Construction
Research and Education. Oral and written
presentation by students on thesis activities
and by faculty on research topics.
C. H. Helliwell
1.482 Studies in Construction Engineering
and Management
Prereq.: -
G (Fall, Spring, Summer)
Units arranged H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit
Individual study of an advanced topic in construction engineering and management,
selected with approval of faculty supervisor.
F. Moavenzadeh
Materials and Structures
1.50 Structural Engineering
Prereq.: 1.04
U (Fall)
3-2-7
Introduces students to methods for the
analysis of statically determinate and indeterminate trusses, beams, and frames. Examples
are: method of sections; conjugate beam
method; moment distribution; etc. Determination of member forces and structural deformations (displacements); approximate methods;
structural stability; energy methods (virtual
force method); introduction to matrix methods.
E. Kausel
Descriptions of Subjects 307
