School of Engineering
1.51 Design of Steel Structures 1.543 Planning and Design of Structural 1.583 Nondestructive Evaluation of
Systems Materials and Structures
Prereq.: 1.50
(Revised Units)
U (Spring) Prereq.: 1.50, 1.51
3-2-7 Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered Prereq.: Permission of instructor
Acad Year 1997-98: G (Fall) G (Fall)
Objective is to develop a solid background in
3-2-7 H-LEVEL Grad Credit 3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
the design principles of steel structures. Emphasis on contemporary design methods using Concerned with the conceptualization and Overview of principles and applications of the
load and resistance factor design. Includes preliminary design of structural systems. state-of-the-art NDE methods. Special emdesign of structural members, joint, connec- Topics include: structural loadings; structural phasis on ultrasonics: fundamental wave motions, and structural systems. components; horizontal-span building struc- tion in solids and fluids, transducers, imaging
S. C. Wooh tures; gravity load systems; lateral load sys- and quantitative measurements, signal
tems; tall buildings; shell roof systems; processing, and basic instrumentation. Applica-
1.52 Design of Concrete Structures lightweight structures; bridge systems. tions: flaw detection, materials characJ. J. Connor, Jr. terization, composite materials and structures.
Prereq.: 1.50 S. C. Wooh
U (Fall)
1.56J Structural Mechanics in Nuclear
3-2-7
Power Technology 1.589 Studies in Structural Design and
Objectives are to develop a solid background Analysis
(Same subject as 22.314J, 2.084J, 13.14J)
in the design principles of concrete structures.
Prereq.: Permission of instructor Prereq.: Permission of instructor
Emphasis on contemporary design methods
Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered G (Fall, Spring, Summer)
using ultimate load design concepts. Includes
Acad Year 1997-98: G (Spring) Units arranged H-LEVEL Grad Credit
design of reinforced concrete members for
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit Can be repeated for credit
bending, shear, and axial loads, and structural
systems. See description under subject 22.314J. Individual study of advanced subjects under
0. Buyukozturk 0. Buyukozturk, J. E. Meyer staff supervision. Content arranged to suit the
particular requirements of the student and in-
1.53 Constructed Facilities Project 1.571 Structural Analysis and Control terested members of the staff.
Laboratory Information: 0. Buyukozturk.
Prereq.: 1.51
Prereq.: 1.59 G (Fall)
1.59 Mechanics of Construction Materials
U (Spring) 3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
1-5-6 Institute LAB Prereq.: 1.04
Computer-based methods for the analysis of
U (Spring)
Concepts, techniques, and devices used to large-scale structural systems. Modeling
3-0-6
measure engineering properties of materials. strategies for complex structures. Application
Emphasis placed on measurement of load- to tall buildings, cable-stayed bridges, and ten- Develops an understanding of the mechanical
deformation characteristics of common con- sion structures. Introduction to the theory of behavior of construction materials. Includes
struction materials, both natural and structural control. Design and implementation study of elastic, plastic, and time-dependent
fabricated. Half-semester project devoted to of control algorithms for structural systems sub- behavior. Deterioration and failure
experimental proof of hypothesis on some jected to quasi-static loading. mechanisms, failure criteria. Applications inaspect of testing or behavior. Emphasis placed J. J. Connor, Jr. clude cementitious materials, steel, timber,
on approximation of testing errors. polymer, pavement materials, and composites.
J. T. Germaine 1.573J Introduction to Structural Mechanics Materials selection.
C. Leung
(Same subject as 13.1OJ)
1.541 Behavior of Concrete Structures
Prereq.: 2.01 or 2.001, 18.03
1.591J Fracture of Structural Materials
Prereq.: 1.52 G (Fall)
G (Fall) 4-0-8 H-LEVEL Grad Credit (Same subject as 3.90J, 13.16J)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit Prereq.: 2.30 or 3.11 or 13.15
See description under subject 13. 1OJ.
G (Fall)
Strength and deformation of concrete under N. M. Patrikalakis, J. J. Connor, Jr.
3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
various states of stress; failure criteria. Fundamental behavior of reinforced concrete struc- 1.581 Advanced Structural Dynamics See description under subject 3.90J.
tures and their members. Basis for design, and F. J. McGarry, K. Masubuchi
code constraints. High-performance concrete Prereq.: 1.50 or equivalent
materials and their use in innovative design G (Spring) 1.592 Mechanical Behavior of Construction
solutions. Slabs: yield line theory. Behavior 3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit Materials
models and nonlinear analysis. Complex sys- Comprehensive subject on the analysis of
tems: bridge structures, concrete shells, and structural systems for dynamic loads. General Prereq.:
containments. formulation for discrete and continuous sys-
0. Buyukozturk tems. Free vibrations and normal modes.
Forced vibrations induced by structural loads
1.542 Behavior of Steel Structures or by ground motions. Viscous and hysteretic
damping. Solutions in the time domain: conPrereq.: 1.51
volution, modal superposition, time-step inG (Spring)
tegration. Solutions in the frequency domain
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
using the fast Fourier transform. Elements of
Conceptual design of steel structural systems. structural control theory, classical optimal conWind and seismic effects. Design criteria for trol. Discrete time control. Application to buildmembers and systems. P-A effects. Structural ings.
connections. Structural analysis versus struc- E. Kausel, J. J. Connor, Jr.
tural design. Inelastic analysis procedures for
stability and limit states. Computer methods
for element and system design. Tall-building
design considerations.
Information: 0. Buyukozturk.
-
G (Spring)
3-2-7 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Develops an understanding of material behavior based on microstructural mechanisms
of deformation and failure. Includes study of
elastic, plastic, creep, fracture, and durability
benavior. Applications to traditional construction materials (steel, concrete, and timber) as
well as recent developments in high-performance civil engineering materials.
C. Leung
308 Chapter Vill
