School of Engineering
Course 1 Civil and Environmental
Engineering
For degree requirements, see listing in
Chapter VII under the School of
Engineering.
Fundamentals 1.04 Solid Mechanics
Prereq.: 8.01, 18.01
U (Spring)
1.00 Introduction to Computers and
3-2-7 REST
Engineering Problem Solving
Static equilibrium. Forces in trusses. Stress,
(Subject meets with 1.001)
Prereq.: 18.01 strain, and Hooke's law; introduction to stressU (Fall, Spring) strain behavior of construction materials. Torsion in members of circular cross-section.
3-1-8 REST
Stresses and deflections in beams. Stresses
Fundamental computational algorithms for en- on inclined planes and the use of Mohr's circle
gineering and scientific applications. Weekly for plane stress. Design project using
programming problems cover numerical Growltiger software package.
analysis, graphics, data structures, searching, L. J. Gibson
sorting, matrix methods, and simulation. Emphasis on developing techniques for solving
1.05 Fluid Mechanics
computational problems in engineering,
science, management, and planning. Subject Prereq.: 8.01, 18.03
taught using the C++ programming language U (Spring)
in the Fall term and the C programming lan- 3-2-7
guage in the Spring term. Some programming Introduction to the mechanics of incompresbackground helpful, particularly for the Fall sible fluid flow. Fluid properties. Hydrostatics.
term. Conservation of mass and momentum using
Fall Term: S. R. Lesman differential and integral balances. The BernoulSpring Term: E A. Kausel li equation. Shear stresses and velocity
profiles in laminar and turbulent flows.
1.001 Introduction to Computers and Dynamic similarity. First law of therEngineering Problem Solving modynamics and the energy equation. Applica-
(New) tions to steady flow in conduits and open
channels, pumps, turbines, drag and lift on im-
(Subject meets with 1.00)
mersed objects.
Prereq.: 18.01
0. S. Madsen
G (Fall, Spring)
3-1-5
1.1OJ Environment and Technology
Meets with undergraduate subject 1.00. See
description under 1.00. (Subject meets with 10.470J, 10.570J,
Fall Term: S. R. Lerman TPP.52J)
Spring Term: E. A. Kausel Prereq.:
1.03 Introduction to Probability and
Statistics for Engineers
Prereq.: 18.01, 18.02
U (Fall)
3-2-7
Elements of probability and statistics with emphasis on engineering applications. Probability
topics include univariate and multivariate distributions, estimation, and prediction; engineering reliability analysis; and Poisson and
Markov processes. Statistics include classical
and Bayesian methods of parameter estimation and hypothesis testing.
D. Veneziano
-
Undergraduate Laboratory
Subjects
1.102 Transportation Laboratory
Prereq.:
U (Fall)
3-0-6
Introduction to environmental problems arising
from commonplace technologies (e.g., plastics, electronics, automobiles). Considers the
sustainability of resource use and the introduction of chemicals into the environment. Illustrates how to predict the fates of those
chemicals in air-water-land-biota systems. Considers environmental and health consequences of products and the processes used for
their manufacture. Discusses how we might
respond to undesirable impacts, including
product redesign and development of policies
to achieve environmentally sensitive improvements. Meets with graduate subject 10.570J,
but assignments differ.
P. Gschwend, J. Ehrenfeld, A. Sarofim
For additional undergraduate introductory
subjects, see 1.30, 1.40, 1.50, 1.60, 1.70,
1.80.
-
U (Spring)
0-3-3 Institute LAB
Can be repeated for credit
Laboratory experience with the properties of
transportation systems. Students formulate an
experiment based upon readings and discussions of current transportation problems. Emphasis on formulation of hypotheses about
properties and effects of different types of
transportation systems; planning of experiments and data collection in the field to test
these hypotheses, analysis of results, and
development of recommendations for changes
in transport systems plans and policies.
Consult N. H. M. Wilson.
1.105 Structural Engineering Laboratory
Prereq.: -
U (Fall)
0-3-3 Institute LAB
Introduces students to properties of structural
materials and behavior of simple structural elements and systems through a series of experiments. Several laboratory projects involve the
student as both the designer and fabricator of
a structure.
C. Leung
1.106 Fluid Mechanics Laboratory
Prereq.: -
U (Fall)
0-2-4 Institute LAB
Credit cannot also be received for 1.108
The measurement and analysis of physical
parameters such as velocity, pressure, salinity,
temperature, dissolved solids, etc., in closed
conduits and natural water bodies. Application
of these techniques in the context of six
laboratory experiments. Certain experiments
complement lectures in 1.05, but concurrent
registration in 1.05 or previous fluid mechanics
experience is not required. (Six additional
units, satisfying the Institute Lab Requirement,
may be obtained by registering for 1.108
rather than 1.106.)
E. E. Adams, H. M. Nepf
300 Chapter Vill
