School of Engineering
Manufacturing 2.82 Introduction to Manufacturing System 2.852 Manufacturing Systems Analysis
Design
Prereq.: 6.041, permission of instructor
(New)
2.800 Tribology G (Spring)
Prereq.: 2.008 3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Prereq.: Permission of instructor U (Spring)
G (Fall) 3-6-3 Institute LAB Models of manufacturing systems, including
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit transfer lines and flexible manufacturing sysConcentrates on the design of manufacturing tems. Calculation of performance measures, inGeometric, chemical, and physical charac- systems. Goal is to design a lean manufactur- cluding throughput, in-process inventory, and
terization of surfaces. Various theories of fric- ing system. By designing an actual manufactur- meeting production commitments. Real-time
tion and wear of metals, polymers, and ing system, students understand the control of scheduling. Effects of machine
ceramics. Special emphasis on delamination engineering design principles necessary to failure, set-ups, and other disruptions on systheory, discussion of erosion, boundary lubrica- enable the implementation and advancement tem performance.
tion and solid-film lubrication. Rolling contact of manufacturing system design. Design areas S. B. Gershwin
problems. Tribological problems in magnetic include factory design, the formation of
recording and electrical contacts. Monitoring manufacturing cells (manned and automated), 2.870 Total Quality Development
and diagnosis of friction and wear. Case machine and setup design for manufacturing
studies. flexibility, and the use of information to control Prereq.: Permission of instructor required for
N. P. Suh, N. Saka manufacturing systems. Elective unit distribu- undergraduates
tion: Advanced disciplinary 6, design 3, lab 3. G (Fall)
2.810 Fundamentals of Manufacturing D. Cochran 3-3-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Processes Total development process that begins with
Prereq.: 2.001, 2.006, 2.008, or equivalents 2.822 Design and Manufacture with strategic needs and voice of customer and conG (Fall) Composite Materials cludes with new product in production. Topics
3-3-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit Prereq.: 2.001, 2.006, 2.30, or equivalent include House of Quality, Pugh Concept Selection, Extended and Enhanced QFD, robustG (Spring)
Introduction to manufacturing processes includ- ness optimization (Taguchi), on-line QC, and
ing machining, injection molding, casting, com- 3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit holistic management. All topics are integrated
posites, assembly, and others. Emphasis on Theory and practice of how structures are into world-class concurrent engineering, an inthe physics and the stochastic nature of the designed and built out of composite materials. depth enhancement of basic TOM. Emphasis
processes, and how these control the quality, Principles introduced through case studies and is on recent improvements in industrial pracrate, cost, and flexibility. Engineering analysis laboratory demonstrations include: solid tice.
and probabilistic treatment include such topics mechanics, anisotropy, differential geometry, D. Clausing
as shrinkage and positioning errors, heat trans- consolidation and flow through porous media,
fer, physical rate limits, information theory, and forming, automation, assembly, and 2.882 Principles of Axiomatic Design
design for manufacture. Group project requires economics. Future developments in composite
fabrication of a product using several proces- materials, markets, and processes discussed. Prereq.: 2.001, 2.006, 2.30, 2.005
ses, usually including CNC machining, injec- T. G. Gutowski G (Spring)
tion molding, casting, and others. Discussion 3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
of new process development and potential 2.830 Control of Manufacturing Introduction to design and design processes
competitive advantages.
Processes for products, processes, and systems; introducT. G. Gutowski, J.-H. Chun
tion to design axioms, corollaries, and
Prereq.: 2.010 or 15.075 or equivalent
theorems; mathematical representation of
G (Spring)
2.812 The Design and Control of design; formulation of design matrix; analysis
Manufacturing Systems 3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit of functional independence; graphical repre-
(New) Process control in manufacturing processes. sentation of functional independence; measure
Prereq.: 2.810 or permission of instructor Discrete system feedback control theory, em- of information content; application to process
G (Spring) pirical/adaptive modeling, and basic process planning; case studies involving real industrial
3-6-3 H-LEVEL Grad Credit physics understanding. A general framework problems; robust design; optimization of
for modeling and control of manufacturing designs. Design of Thinking Design Machine.
Focuses on the history, development, and processes is developed. Various existing N. P. Suh
design of manufacturing systems. Project em- forms of process control are studied, including
phasis on designing a lean production system. off-line optimization, statistical process control, 2.890J Proseminar in Manufacturing
Covers factory design, the design and forma- and real-time machine and process control.
tion of manufacturing cells (manned and The control approach to process physics is ex- (Same subject as 15.792J, 3.80J, 10.792J,
automated), machine and setup design for amined in the context of specific manufactur- 16.985J)
manufacturing flexibility, and the use of infor- ing processes. Prereq.:
mation to control manufacturing systems. D. E. Hardt
Relationships with area manufacturers have
been established so that actual manufacturing 2.851J System Optimization and Analysis
system design problems are examined and for Manufacturing
solved in conjunction with the term project.
D. Cochran (Same subject as 15.066J, 3.83,J)
Prereq.: 18.02
G (Summer)
4-0-8 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
See description under subject 15.066J.
S. C. Graves, J. P. Clark
-
G (Fall, Spring)
Units arranged [P/D/F]
Can be repeated for credit
See description under subject 15.792J.
Fall Term: D. B. Rosenfield
Spring Term: J. Carroll
322 Chapter Vill
