Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering Course 1
Transportation
1.200 Methods for Transportation Systems
Analysis
Prereq.: -
1.203J Logistical and Transportation 1.206 Optimization of Transportation
Planning Methods Systems
(Same subject as 6.281J, 11.526J, 13.665J, Prereq.: Permission of instructor
15.073J, 16.76J) Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Prereq.: 6.431, 15.075 Acad Year 1997-98: G (Fall)
G (Fall) 3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
G (Fall) 3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Explores a variety of optimization techniques
3-1-8
Quantitative techniques of operations research for the solution of large-scale transportation
Provides the methodological foundation neces- with emphasis on applications in transportation problems. Models and solution methods, insary for the analytical study of the components systems analysis (urban, air, ocean, highway, cluding decomposition and relaxation, are
of transportation systems and the relationships pickup and delivery systems) and in the plan- presented for a variety of problems faced by
between them. Focuses on the use of linear ning and design of logistically oriented urban carriers and/or shippers. Students are required
equation systems, optimization techniques, service systems (e.g., fire and police depart- to complete a research project and to present
and stochastic and statistical models. ments, emergency medical services, emergen- their findings. Alternate years.
Develops the mathematical prerequisites for cy repair services). Unified study of functions C. Bamhart
many advanced subjects in transportation. of random variables, geometrical probability,
C. Bamhart multi-server queuing theory, spatial location 1.207 Models and Algorithms for
theory, network analysis and graph theory, Transportation Networks
1.201 Transportation Systems and relevant methods of simulation. Computer (Revised Content)
exercises, discussion of implementation difficulPrereq.: Permission of instructor ties. Prereq.: 1.200 or permission of instructor
G (Fall) A. I. Barnett, R. C. Larson, A. R. Odoni G (Fall)
3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit 3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
introduces the fundamental elements and is- 1.204 Computer Algorithms in Formulation, analysis, and solution of network
sues shaping passenger and freight transporta- Transportation problems. Topics include: network equilibrium
tion systems. Discusses the role of analysis; static system optimum traffic assignPrereq.: 1.00 or 1.001 or permission of instructransportation systems in society and ment; time-dependent approaches for dynamic
measures of system effectiveness on many tor systems; stochastic systems; simulation apG (Spring)
dimensions, including economic, environmen- proaches; network control; implementation of
tal, and political. Covers deterministic and 3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit various solution methods to solve large-scale
stochastic models of system performance and Teaches techniques and tools for design, applications.
the determinants of transportation travel analysis, and implementation of efficient algo- /. Chabini
demand. Analyzes transportation networks, in- rithms. An integrated view of algorithms, data
cluding prediction of costs and service quality. structures, and computer architecture is em- 1.208J Transportation and Logistics
Considers the design of transportation ser- phasized. Algorithmic techniques studied in- Analysis
vices and facilities for various modes and inter- clude: greedy algorithms, divide-and-conquer,
modal operations. Case studies are used to dynamic programming, probabilistic algo- (Same subject as 15.770J)
show the application of methods to different rithms, network optimization based algorithms Prereq.: Permission of instructor
types of transportation systems. Institutional and graph traversal techniques. Advanced G (Spring)
and policy issues are addressed. topics include: high-performance computing 3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
J. Sussman and real-time optimization. Introduction to inventory theory. Analysis of
I. Chabini tradeoffs between transportation and inventory
1.202 Demand Modeling cost. Routing and scheduling with inventory
Prereq.: Permission of instructor 1.205 Advanced Demand Modeling considerations. Distribution network design
G (Spring) Prereq.: 1.202 or 14.388 and carrier network design. Optimization of car-
3-1-8 H-LEVEL Grad Credit G (Fall) rier networks with emphasis on truck and rail
networks. Integration of carrier and shipper
Analysis and forecasting of demand for 3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit perspective in system models. International
facilities and services. Emphasis on collection Theories and applications of behavior models. logistics issues.
and analysis of survey data. Review elements Includes: linear and nonlinear latent variable Y. Sheffi
of probability, sampling, and statistical models, multidimensional probabilistic choice
methods. Includes alternative sample designs models, survey design, statistical estimation 1.209J Case Studies in Logistics and
and data collection methods, matrix-entry es- techniques with multiple data sources, model Supply Chain Management
timation methods, linear regression analysis, transferability, estimation and forecasting with
discrete choice methods, estimation and test- very large choice sets, joint discrete and con- (Same subject as 15.771J)
ing of disaggregate and aggregate models, ag- tinuous models, dynamical models. Issues in Prereq.: Permission of instructor
gregate forecasting methods and simulation. model specification, including use of stated Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Illustrated with applications from the fields of preference data, and analysis of complex Acad Year 1997-98: G (Fall)
transportation, housing, telecommunications, choices. Term paper required. 3-0-6
and marketing. M. E. Ben-Akiva A combination of lectures and cases covering
M. E. Ben-Akiva the strategic, management, and operating issues in contemporary logistics and integrated
supply chain management. Includes: logistics
strategy; supply chain restructuring and
change management; and distribution, customer service, and inventory policy.
Y. Sheffi
Descriptions of Subjects 303
