Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering Course 1
1.725J Chemicals in the Environment: Fate Aquatic Sciences, Water Quality 1.77 Water Quality Control
and Transport Control, and Environmental Prereq.: 1.05
(Same subject as TPP.51J) Management G (Spring)
Prereq.: Permission of instructor 3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
G (Fall)
Emphasis on mathematical models for predict-
3-0-9 1.75 Limnology and Wetland Ecology
ing distribution and fate of effluents discharged
For Institute students in all departments inter- Prereq.: Permission of instructor into lakes, reservoirs, rivers, estuaries, and
ested in the behavior of chemicals in the en- Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered oceans. Focuses on formulation and structure
vironment (see TPP listings for other subjects). Acad Year 1997-98: G (Spring) of models as well as analytical and simple
Emphasis on man-made chemicals, their 3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit numerical solution techniques. Role of element
movement through water, air, and soil, and cycles, such as oxygen, nitrogen, and phosDominant physical, chemical, and biological
their eventual fate. Physical transport, as well phorus, as water quality indicators. Offshore
features of lakes and wetlands: basin geology,
as chemical and biological sources and sinks, water budget, wind-driven hydromechanical outfalls and diffusion. Salinity intrusion in esare discussed. Linkages to health effects, sour- phenomena, heat balance, thermal stratifica- tuaries. Thermal stratification, eutrophication,
ces and control, and policy aspects. Core re- and sedimentation processes in lakes and
tion, radiation environment, biological comquirement for Environmental M.Eng. program. reservoirs. Core requirement for Environmenmunities, and cycles of major elements.
H. F. Hemond tal M.Eng. program.
Characterization of wetlands, wetland biota,
E. E. Adams
and chemical conditions of wetlands.
1.731 Water Resource Systems Methodologies of modern limnology, including
Prereq.: 1.72, 1.714, 18.03 or equivalent field methods and use of models; and current 1.782 Environmental and
G (Spring) issues in lake and wetland management. Alter- Geoenvironmental Engineering M.Eng.
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit nate years. Project
H. F. Hemond (Revised Units)
Survey of deterministic optimization methods
Prereq.: Limited to Course 1 M.Eng. Students
for management of large-scale water projects.
1.76 Aquatic Chemistry G (Fall, IAP, Spring)
Linear, integer, nonlinear, and dynamic
5-0-10
programming illustrated with case studies. Ap- Prereq.: 5.11
plications include reservoir and irrigation G (Fall) Core requirement for Environmental and
development, conjunctive use of surface and 3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit Geoenvironmental M.Eng. program. Designed
groundwater, and hazardous waste remedia- to teach about environmental restoration enQuantitative treatment of chemical processes
tion. gineering through the use of case studies,
in aquatic systems. A brief review of chemical
D. McLaughlin computer software tools, and seminars from inthermodynamics and kinetics is followed by
dustrial experts. The MMR Supertund site lostudies of acid-base, precipitation-dissolution,
1.732 Hydrologic Estimation and Prediction coordination, and reduction-oxidation reactions cated at Otis Air National Guard Base is the
case study on which lectures and student
Prereq.: 1.715 of interest in systems such as lakes, oceans, projects are based. Topics include
Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered rivers, estuaries, groundwaters, and waste- groundwater modeling theory, legislative
Acad Year 1997-98: G (Fall) waters. Emphasis on equilibrium calculations framework and regulations, geotechnical en-
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit in model systems as a tool for understanding gieering, environmental chemistry, risk
the variables that govern the chemical comQuantitative methods for describing uncertain- position of aquatic systems and the fate of inor- analysis and risk management, remediation
ty and natural variability. Estimating unobserv- ganic pollutants. 5.60 is a suggested goals, site characterization, remediation techable physical parameters from field prerequisite. Suitable for advanced under- nologies, site closure and pollution prevention.
measurements. Real-time forecasting and con- graduates. Students must register for 1.782 for both IAP
trol. Environmental data assimilation. Case B. Voelker and spring term.
studies include stream flow forecasting, reser- F. Perkins
voir operations, characterization of subsurface
1.761 Environmental Chemical Kinetics
contamination. 1.80 Fundamentals of Ecology
(New)
D. McLaughlin (Revised Units)
Prereq.: 1.76 or permission of instructor
Prereq.:
Acad Year 1996-97: G (Spring)
Acad Year 1997-98: Not offered
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Advanced subject emphasizing kinetics and
mechanisms of chemical processes in aquatic
systems such as surface waters, groundwaters, wastewaters, and cloudwaters. Topics
include coordination and redox chemistry, reactions at the solid-solution interface (such as formation and dissolution of minerals,
coagulation, and sorption), photochemistry,
and radical chemistry. Offered alternate years.
B. Voelker
-
U (Fall)
3-1-8 REST
Basic subject dealing with the science of ecology; principles of interrelationships between organisms and their environment. Development
of basic concepts of energy flow and
biogeochemical cycles in ecosystems; productivity; trophic dynamics; community structure
and stability; competition and predation; evolution and natural selection; population growth;
and physiological ecology. Emphasis on
aquatic systems.
S. W. Chisholm
1.81J Chemicals in the Environment:
Toxicology
(Same subject as TOX.104J, TPP.53J)
Prereq.: 5.11, 7.012/7.013/7.014
U (Spring)
3-0-9
See description under subject TOX.104J.
W. G. Thilly
Descriptions of Subjects 311
