Department of Materials Science and Engineering Course 3
Course 3 Materials Science and
Engineering
For degree requirements, see listing
in Chapter VII under the School of
Engineering.
3.UR Undergraduate Research
Prereq.: -
U (Fall, Spring, Summer)
Units arranged [P/D/F]
Can be repeated for credit
3.URG Undergraduate Research
Prereq.: -
U (Fall, Spring, Summer)
Units arranged
Can be repeated for credit
Extended participation in work of a research
group. Independent study of literature, direct involvement in group's research (commensurate
with student skills), and project work under an
individual faculty member. See UROP coordinator for registration procedures.
D. K. Roylance
3.ThU Undergraduate Thesis
Prereq.: -
3.03 Chemical Metallurgy
Prereq.: 3.185
U (Spring)
3-0-9
Thermodynamics and kinetic principles along
with aspects of process control and economics
involved in extraction and processing of metals. Unit operations and processes. Generalizing operations in terms of gas-liquid,
solid-solid, gas-solid, liquid-liquid, and gassolid-liquid reactions. Electrochemical processes. Designing energy-efficient and
environmentally sound processes.
U. B. Pal
3.035, 3.036, 3.037 Special Problems in
Materials Science and Engineering
Prereq.: Permission of instructor
U (Fall, IAP, Spring, Summer)
Units arranged [P/D/F]
Can be repeated for credit
U (Fall, Spring, Summer)
3.038, 3.039, 3.04 Special Problems in
Units arranged
Materials Science and Engineering
Can be repeated for credit
Prereq.: Permission of instructor
Program of undergraduate research, leading U (Fall, lAP, Spring, Summer)
to the writing of an S.B. thesis; to be arranged
Units arranged
by the student and an appropriate MIT faculty
Can be repeated for credit
member.
Consult D. K. Roylance. For undergraduates desiring to carry on
projects of their own choosing, which may be
3.00 Thermodynamics of Materials experimental, theoretical, or of a design nature. Also for undergraduate studies arranged
Prereq.: 18.02
by students or staff, which may consist of semiU (Fall)
nars, assigned reading, or laboratory projects.
4-0-8 REST See UROP Coordinator for registration proceEssential features of first, second, and third dures.
laws of thermodynamics and their application D. K. Roylance
to materials. Statistical interpretation of
entropy. Experimental techniques used to 3.041 Undergraduate Research Seminar
measure thermodynamic functions. Introduces
Prereq.:
phase diagrams, phase rule, and thermodynamics of solutions. Thermochemistry of
homogeneous and heterogeneous reactions.
G. Ceder
3.01 Physical Chemistry of Materials
Prereq.: 3.00 or 5.60 or 2.40 or 10.213
U (Spring)
4-0-8
Reactions involving pure condensed phases
and gaseous phase, behavior of solutions, free
energy-composition and phase diagrams of binary and ternary systems, reaction equilibria in
systems containing components in condensed
solution. Electrochemistry, corrosion, Gibbs
phase rule, chemical kinetics, elementary
mechanisms, reaction rate constant, activation
energy, surface tension.
D. V. Ragone
-
3.05 Computer Models of Physical and
Engineering Systems
Prereq.. 18.03 or 18.034, 1.00
U (Spring)
3-1-8
Engineering School-Wide Elective Subject.
Description given at end of this chapter in
SWE section on page 562.
F. Peiia-Mora
3.062 Polymer Chemistry
Prereq.: 3.091 or 5.11
U (Fall)
4-0-8
Preparation of polymeric materials and their
characterization. Topics: fundamentals of
chain and step growth polymerization,
chemistry of organic radicals and ions, synthesis-structure-property relationships, and
use of modern techniques for determination of
polymer composition, molecular weight, and
microstructure.
M. F. Rubner
3.063 Polymer Physics
Prereq.: 3.062, 3.00
U (Spring)
4-0-8
Principles underlying the physics and physical
chemistry of polymers in solution and in the
solid state. Topics include conformation and
molecular dimensions of polymer chains; thermodynamics of polymer solutions; an examination of the glassy, crystalline, and rubbery
elastic states of polymers; kinetics and thermodynamics of crystallization; liquid crystallinity in polymers; thermodynamics of rubber
elasticity. The electrical, optical, transport, and
mechanical properties of polymers are
analyzed with respect to the above topics.
U (Spring)
E. L. Thomas
0-3-0
Basic skills for conducting research in 3.064 Polymer Engineering
materials science and engineering. Includes
Prereq.: 3.11, 3.185
library resources, how to plan experiments,
U (Spring)
laboratory safety, data analysis, oral presenta-
3-0-9 tions and technical writing of proposals and
reports. Intended for the sophomore year, Overview of engineering analysis and design
open to freshmen. techniques for synthetic polymers. Treatment
T. W. Eagar, D. K. Roylance of materials selection, mechanical characterization, and processing in design of loadbearing and environment-compatible
structures.
F. J. McGarry, D. K. Roylance
Descriptions of Subjects 325
