School of Engineering
2.648 Superconducting Magnets
Prereq.: 2.005, 2.51
G (Spring)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Focuses on one important engineering application of superconductors - generation of largescale and intense magnetic fields. Review of
electromagnetic theory; detailed treatment of
magnet design and operational issues, e.g.,
"usable" superconductors, field and stress
analyses, magnet instabilities, ac losses and
mechanical disturbances, quench and protection, experimental techniques, cryogenics.
New high-temperature superconductors for
magnets - design and operational issues at
high temperatures.
Y. Iwasa, E. S. Bobrov
Experimental Engineering
2.670 Mechanical Engineering Tools
Prereq.: -
2.672 Project Laboratory 2.737 Mechatronics
(Revised Units)
Prereq.: 2.001, 2.003, 2.005, 2.006, 2.671
U (Fall, Spring) Prereq.: 1.00, 2.010, 6.071, or equivalents; per-
1-3-2 Institute LAB mission of instructor
U (Fall, Spring)
Engineering laboratory subject for mechanical
3-5-4
engineering juniors and seniors. Major emphasis on interplay between analytical and ex- Introduction to designing mechatronic sysperimental methods in solution of research tems, which require integration of the mechaniand development problems. Communication cal and electrical engineering disciplines within
(written and oral) of results is also a strong a unified framework. Significant laboratorycomponent of the course. Groups of two or based design experiences form subject's core.
three students work together on three projects Final project. Topics include: low-level interfacduring the term. Limited enrollment. ing of software with hardware; use of C lanW. Cheng, D. Hart guage and assembly language to implement
real-time tasks; digital logic; analog interfacing
and power amplifiers; measurement and sensing; electromagnetic and optical transducers;
control of mechatronic systems. Limited enrollDesign ment. Elective unit distribution: Advanced disciplinary, 3, design 3, lab 6.
D. Trumper, K. Youcef-Toumi
2.72 Elements of Mechanical Design
Prereq.: 2.001, 2.007 2.739J Product Design and Development
U (Fall)
(Same subject as 15.783J)
3-3-6
Prereq.: 15.760 or 15.761 or 2.731 or 2.73 or
Examination and practice in the application of permission of instructor
U (IAP)
many mechanical design elements, including G (Spring)
1-3-2 [P/D/F]
control components. Students working in 3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Introduces the fundamentals of machine tool groups will design, fabricate, and test
See description under subject 15.783J.
and computer tool use. Students work with a prototype devices in response to requests
S. D. Eppinger
variety of machine tools including the from industrial sponsors. Topics: typical
bandsaw, milling machine, and lathe. Instruc- machine elements, power transmission eletion given on the use of the Athena network ments, motors and prime movers, control ele- 2.74 Optimal Product Redesign
and Athena-based software packages includ- ments, material selection, and assembly Prereq.: 2.007 or equivalent, access to PC or
ing MATLAB, MAPLE, XESS, and CAD. Em- techniques. It is recommended that students Macintosh
phasis on problem solving, not programming not take this subject at the same time as 2.73. G (Fall)
or algorithmic development. Assignments are Elective unit distribution: Advanced discipli- 3-0-6
project-oriented relating to mechanical en- nary, 6; design, 6.
gineering topics. It is recommended that stu- C. R. Peterson Reverse engineering products, demonstrated
dents take this subject in the first lAP after with a consumer product case study
declaring the major in Mechanical Engineering. 2.721 Design for Production redesigned in class through homework assignD. P. Hart, K. N. Otto ments. Lectures discuss: identifying objectives
Prereq.: 2.001, 2.007, 2.72, 2.008 a product must satisfy; determining what the
U (Spring) product has to satisfy the objectives; functional
2.671 Measurement and Instrumentation
2-3-4 modeling of the product; morphological
Prereq.: 2.003, 8.02 analysis; physical modeling for use in optimizaIntended primarily as a follow-up to 2.72. StuU (Fall, Spring) tion studies using readily available computer
dents fabricate and test prototype devices that
2-3-7 Institute LAB tools; notions of performance and quality;
have been designed for real clients in 2.72.
designed experiments; prototyping solutions
Experimental techniques for observation and Simultaneously, these devices are redesigned
under real-world conditions.
measurement of physical variables such as for economical production in light of prototype
K. Otto
force, strain, temperature, flowrate, and ac- experience and accompanying lecture material
celeration. Emphasizes principles of transduc- on manufacturing processes and materials.
tion, measurement circuitry, spectral analysis, C. R. Peterson 2.744 Product Design
uncertainty analysis, computer-aided ex- Prereq.:
perimentation, and technical reporting. Typical 2.73 Design Projects
laboratory experiments involve oscilloscopes, (Revised Units)
thermocouples, strain gages, digital recorders,
lasers, etc. Basic material and lab objectives Prereq.: 2.007, 2.008
are developed in lectures. Six units may be ap- Acad Year 1996-97: U (Fall)
plied to the General Institute Laboratory Re- Acad Year 1997-98: Not offered
quirement. Enrollment may be limited. 3-3-6
J. H. Lienhard, C. F. Dewey Practice in engineering design through termlong projects chosen to integrate significant
portions of material covered in prerequisites.
Emphasizes creative solutions to current engineering design problems, team work, and
fabrication of prototypes. Often major involvement of a company in project definition and
teaching. Lectures address the breadth of
topics involved in engineering design from
analytical techniques to human-machine interactions, economics, applied ethics, and patent
laws.
W. C. Flowers, W. Seering
-
G (Spring)
3-1-8
Project-centered subject addressing transformation of ideas into successful new products
which are properly matched to the user and
the market. Students are asked to take a more
complete view of a new product and to gain experience with designs judged on their aesthetics, ease of use, and sensitivities to the
realities of the marketplace. Lectures on
modern design process, design for quality, and
design for manufacturability. Guest lectures
and case studies from practitioners.
D. R. Wallace. W. C. Flowers
320 Chapter Vill
