Explanatory Notes
Guide to Subject Listings
The descriptions in this chapter are subject to Subject Information One unit represents approximately 14 hours of
change. The final list of subjects to be offered work. Units arranged indicates that units are
in 1996-97 is published with the class specially arranged by the instructor.
Information about the subject appears below
schedules booklet prior to the beginning of
the first horizontal line. Subjects fulfilling the General Institute Requireeach term.
ments, such as BIOLOGY, PHYSICS, CALC,
On the World Wide Web, see 18.014 Calculus with Theory CHEMISTRY, REST (Restricted Electives in
http://registrar.mit.edu/ for an integrated, Science and Technology, formerly SCI DIST),
(18.012)
searchable subject listing/schedule. Prereq.: - 4 Institute LAB, or HASS-D (Humanities, Arts,
and Social Sciences Distribution) are so desigThe following are examples of undergraduate U (Fall)
nated to the right of the credit units.
and graduate subject listings. Each subject list- 5-0-7 CALC I
ing consists of three parts: the subject name, Credit cannot also be received for 18.01 or HASS indicates subjects that can be used to
subject information, and subject description. 18.011 satisfy the Humanities, Arts, and Social Sciences Requirement (other than HASS-D subCovers the same material as 18.01, but at a jects).
deeper and more rigorous level. Emphasizes
Subject Name careful reasoning and understanding of proofs. HASS-D Language Option indicates lanAssumes knowledge of elementary calculus. guage subjects which may be substituted for
The subject name consists of its number and Topics: axioms for the real numbers; the one HASS-D subject.
title, and appears above the first horizontal line. Riemann integral; limits, theorems on con- [P/D/F] appears to the right of the credit units
tinuous functions; derivatives of functions of if the subject is graded on a P, D, or F basis
5.77J Topics in Metabolic Biochemistry one variable; the fundamental theorems of cal- (where P means C or better performance).
(New) culus; Taylor's theorem; infinite series, power H-LEVEL Grad Credit indicates an approved
series, rigorous treatment of the elementary
(Same subject as 7.75J) functions. subject for higher graduate-level degree credit.
Prereq.: 7.05 or 5.07 J. R. Munkres In some cases, a message follows the designaG (Fall) tion indicating that the subject is H-level in cer-
4-0-8 H-LEVEL Grad Credit The former number of a renumbered subject tain departments.
is indicated in parentheses below the first Can be repeated for credit appears under
Special topics include major metabolic path- horizontal line. the credit units if the subject can be taken
ways for the biosynthesis of certain cellular
more than once for academic credit.
constituents and oxidative metabolism. Em- Same subject as appears in parentheses folphasis is on enzymology and methods used to lowed by the subject's other number(s) if the
understand metabolism and enzymatic proces- subject is joint or SWE. Meets with appears if
ses. the subject is taught together with one or more Subject Description
G. M. Brown, J. Stubbe different-level subjects, or if part of the subject
is taught in conjunction with another subject. The subject description appears below the
J at the end of a subject number indicates that Prerequisite subjects, if any, are listed, or the second horizontal line.
this subject is offered jointly by more than one prerequisite is described. Numbers in italics indepartment. The subject numbers of the other dicate corequisites - prerequisite subjects 21F.101 Chinese
departments are indicated in the Subject Infor- that may be taken simultaneously with the sub- (21.245)
mation section following the phrase Same ject described. If there are no prerequisites or Prereq.: subject as. corequisites, a dash (-) appears. Prerequisites may be waived by the instructor in
(New) below the subject number and title indi- charge for particularly well-qualified students.
cates a subject offering that is new to the
catalogue. (Revised Units) or (Revised Con- Year offered may state Acad Year 1996-97:
tent) below the subject number and title indi- Not offered or Acad Year 1997-98: Not ofcates a change from the previous catalogue. fered. There is no comment if the subject is offered in both academic years 1996-97 and
1997-98.
Subject level and term follow. U is an undergraduate subject, and G is a subject primarily
for graduate students. IAP is MIT's Independent Activities Period.
Credit units, which indicate a subject's time
distribution, are represented by three numbers
separated by dashes. The number of units assigned for recitation and lecture is first; for
laboratory, design, or fieldwork second; and
for preparation, third. Add all of the units
together to obtain the total credit for a subject.
- U (Fall)
4-0-8 HASS
Introduction to spoken and written modern 4.
Chinese (Mandarin). Pronunciation, sentence
structure, grammar, conversation, reading and
writing. Lab work required. Enrollment limited
to 20 students.
Y Tai
Any subject open only to special groups is so
noted at the end of its description. If the subject description does not appear, the number
of the subject under which the description appears is given.
The name of the instructor(s) in charge as
known at the time of publication is listed in
italics, or the name of the departmental contact is listed in regular type.
Descriptions of Subjects 299
