School of Engineering
2.073 Solid Mechanics - Plasticity and 2.094 Finite Element Analysis of Solids and 2.141 Modeling and Simulation of Dynamic
Inelastic Deformation Fluids Systems
Prereq.: 2.30 Prereq.: 2.01 or 2.001, 18.075 Prereq.: 2.151
G (Fall) Acad Year 1996-97: G (Fall) G (Fall)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit Acad Year 1997-98: Not offered 3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Physical basis of plastic/inelastic deformation Mathematical modeling of complex engineerof solids. Continuum constitutive models for Basic principles of continuum mechanics and ing systems at a level of detail compatible with
small and large deformation of elastic- finite element methods, modern application to the design and implementation of modern con-
(visco)plastic solids. Analytical and numerical solution of practical problems in solid, struc- trol systems. Wave-like and diffusive energy
solution of selected boundary value problems. tural, and fluid mechanics, heat and mass transmission systems. Multiport energy storing
Applications to deformation processing of me- transfer, other field problems. Kinematics of fields and dissipative fields; consequences of
tals. deformation, strain and stress measures, con- symmetry and asymmetry. Nonlinear
L. Anand, D. M. Parks, M. C. Boyce stitutive relations, conservation laws, virtual mechanics and canonical transformation
work, and variational principles. Discretization theory. Examples will include mechanisms,
2.083 Applied Elasticity of governing equations using finite element electromechanical transducers, electronic sysmethods. Solution of central problems using tems, fluid systems, thermal systems. compresPrereq.: 2.30 or 2.002, 18.03 existing computer programs. sible flow processes, chemical processes.
G (Fall) K. J. Bathe N. Hogan
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Introduction to the theory and applications of 2.151 Advanced System Dynamics and
elastic solids. Review strain, stress, and stress- Control
strain law. Several of the following topics:
System Dynamics and Prereq.: 2.02 or 2.003, 2.14, 18.06
Anisotropic material behavior. Piezoelectric
G (Fall, Spring)
materials. Effective properties of composites. Control
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Structural mechanics of beams and plates.
Energy methods for structures. Two-dimen- Analytical and graphical descriptions of statesional problems. Stress concentration at 2.100 Information and Probability determined dynamic physical systems; time
cavities, concentrated loads, cracks, and dis- (New) and frequency domain representations; syslocations. Variational methods and their ap- tem characteristics - controllability, obserPrereq.: 2.003
plications; introduction to the finite element vability, stability; linear and nonlinear system
U (Fall)
method. Introduction to wave propagation. responses. Modification of system charac-
3-0-9
J. H. Williams, Jr., R. Abeyaratne teristics using feedback. State observers, KalRobots, gas turbines, and toasters share a man filters. Modeling/performance trade-offs in
2.084J Structural Mechanics in Nuclear common feature: they have to get and process control system design. Emphasis on applicaPower Technology information in order to function. Subject tion of techniques to physical systems.
provides an introduction to information theory K. Youcef-Toumi, N. Hogan, D. Rowell
(Same subject as 22.314J, 1.56J, 13.14J) as applied to problems in control, design, and
Prereq.: Permission of instructor manufacturing. Topics treated include prob- 2.152 Nonlinear Control System Design
Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered ability and statistics, channel capacity and comAcad Year 1997-98: G (Spring) munications, the characterization and control Prereq.: 2.151 or 6.241 or equivalent
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit of noisy systems, the generation and propaga- G (Spring)
See description under subject 22.314J. tion of errors in manufacturing, and the 3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
J. E. Meyer, 0. Buyukozturk mechanics and design of information-process- Introduction to applied nonlinear control. Noning devices. Elective unit distribution: ad- linear stability theory, Lyapunov analysis,
2.093 Computer Methods in Dynamics vanced disciplinary, 9; design, 3. Barbalat's lemma. Feedback linearization, inS. Lloyd ternal dynamics. Sliding surfaces. Adaptive
Prereq.: 2.03J, 18.075 nonlinear control. Stable neural network conG (Spring) 2.101 Computer Models of Physical and trol, multiresolution analysis. Emphasis on ap-
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit Engineering Systems plications to physical systems (robots, aircraft,
Formulation of finite element methods for Prereq.: 18.03 or 18.034, 1.00 spacecraft, underwater vehicles).
analysis of dynamic problems in solids, struc- U (Spring) J.-J. E. Slotine
tures, fluid mechanics, and heat transfer. Com- 3-1-8
puter calculation of matrices and numerical 2.153 Adaptive Control: Theory and
solution of equilibrium equations by direct in- Engineering School-Wide Elective Subject. Applications
tegration and mode superposition. Effective Description given at end of this chapter in
eigensolution techniques for calculation of fre- SWE section on page 562. Prereq.: 2.151
quencies and mode shapes. Digital computer F. Penia-Mora G (Fall)
3-2-7
coding techniques and use of an existing
general purpose finite element analysis pro- A graduate subject on the basic principles of
gram. Modeling of problems and interpretation adaptive controllers. Topics include adaptive
of numerical results. controllers for first- and second-order systems,
K. J. Bathe strictly positive real-transfer functions, persistent excitation, stability of general adaptive systems, minimum variance and LO-controllers,
n-step ahead predictive controllers, robustness
properties, adaptive control of nonlinear systems, and connections to feedback linearization, gain-scheduling, and neural networks.
Laboratory exercises pertain to the implementation of adaptive PID controllers in mechanical systems.
A. M. Annaswamy
316 Chapter Vill
