Department of Mechanical Engineering Course 2
2.891 Management for Engineers
Prereq.: -
G (Spring)
2-0-4
Provides an overview of management issues
for graduate engineers. Topic is approached in
terms of career options as engineering practitioner, manager, and entrepreneur. Specific
topics include semantics, finance, TOM, starting a company, and people management.
Through selected readings from texts and
cases, focuses on the development of individual skills and management tools. Requires student participation and discussion,
term paper. Limited to 25 graduate students.
A. V. d'Arbeloff, T. G. Gutowski
Polymers and Fibers
2.921J Deformation and Fracture of
Polymers
(Same subject as 3.951J)
Prereq.: 2.001 or 3.11
G (Fall)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Linear and nonlinear viscoelasticity below and
above Tg. Phenomenology of plastic deformation in crystalline, and glassy polymers,
molecular theories for yielding, post yield extensions for intermediate and large strains,
development of deformation textures,
anisotropic yield conditions. Fracture in
polymers, statistical damage accumulation.
Crazing as a precursor to fracture, kinetics of
nucleation of crazes, mechanics of craze extension, development and propagation of
cracks. Fatigue in polymers under both static
and cyclic loading.
/. V. Yannas
2.93J Engineers, Scientists, and Public
Controversies
(Same subject as STS.012J)
Prereq.: -
U (Spring)
3-0-9 HASS
See description under subject STS.012J.
C. Weiner
Special Studies
2.942 Entrepreneurship
Prereq.: -
2.943 Engineering Risk-Benefit Analysis
Prereq.: 18.02
G (Spring)
3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Engineering School-Wide Elective Subject.
Description given at end of this chapter in
SWE section on page 562.
G. Apostolakis, A. W. Drake, A. R. Odoni
2.95J Real-World Ethics
(Same subject as TPP.09J)
Prereq.:
G (Spring)
4-0-5
Engineering School-Wide Elective Subject.
Description given at end of this chapter in
SWE section on page 562.
T. G. Gutowski
-
U (Spring)
3-0-6 HASS
Prepares students to recognize ethical
problems that commonly arise in the
workplace, and to find, evaluate, use, and
strengthen institutional supports for acting on
ethical concerns. Lectures survey issues and
practices in corporate and research contexts.
In discussion sections, students develop ethics
scenarios on issues of their choosing and explore them with representatives of corporations, universities, etc., at which students
might work or study. Open to juniors and
seniors. Others by permission.
C. Whitbeck, L. Bucciarelli
2.951 Engineering Internship
Prereq.: -
2.953J Research Ethics
(Same subject as 16.954J, TPP.41J)
Prereq.:
U (Fall, Spring, Summer)
0-6-0 [P/D/F]
Can be repeated for credit
2.952 Advanced Engineering Internship
Prereq.: 2.951
G (Fall, Spring, Summer)
0-6-0 [P/D/F]
Can be repeated for credit
Provides academic credit for undergraduate
and graduate work assignments for Mechanical Engineering students participating in the
Engineering Internship Program. Undergraduate participation is approximately six
months over two summers of practical work in
manufacturing, engineering, research and
development at an industrial plant. Graduate
participation by students admitted to the
Department's graduate program consists of approximately seven months at industrial plant.
Credit is awarded after evaluation and approval of the actual work performed.
P. Griffith
-
G (Spring)
3-0-3
Examines the norms that govern research, the
new policies for coping with changing conditions of research. Prepares students to address problems of research ethics and identify,
evaluate, use, and strengthen institutional supports for acting on such ethical concerns. The
core responsibilities for integrity of research
results and for proper crediting of sources and
collaborators are explored, together with the
moral problems which, if poorly handled, are liable to create pressures to "cut corners." This
is a half-term subject, taught in the first half of
the term.
C. Whitbeck
2.954J Ethical Problems in Advanced
Engineering and Science
(Same subject as TPP.42J)
Prereq.: 2.953J, 16.954J, TPP 41J, permission
of instructor
G (Spring)
3-0-3
Examines moral problems in doctoral and postdoctoral engineering and science, and the
scope and limits of the individual's or
professor's opportunities and responsibility to
address such problems. Topics such as
responsibility for human subjects, for research
animals, for safety, for "bugs," for public understanding of technology, for environmental effects, and issues such as rights of privacy (the
new genetics, data banks), technology transfer, and academic-industrial collaboration. This
is a half-term subject, taught in the second half
of the term.
C. Whitbeck, N. Kiang
2.96 Management in Engineering
Prereq.: -
U (Fall)
3-0-9
Introduction of engineering management in
variety of settings: 1) role of engineering and
its relationship to other functions, 2)
managerial tools and concepts used in engineering organizations, 3) practice in handling
short- and long-term problems, 4) career
strategy and development. Topics: financial
principles, management of innovation, engineering project planning and control, human
factors, career planning, patents, and technical
strategy. Case method of instruction emphasizes participation in class discussion.
Juniors, seniors, or graduate students. Elective
unit distribution: Advanced disciplinary, 6;
Design, 6. Engineering School-Wide Elective
subject.
J.-H. Chun
Descriptions of Subjects 323
