School of Engineering
3.97J Mechanical Forces in Organ Archaeology and Archaeological
Development and Remodeling
Science
(Same subject as 2.785J, HST.523J)
Prereq.: 3.091 or 5.11; 2.005 or 5.60; 7.012 or
3.980 Ancient Mexican Bells: Technology
7.013
and Context
G (Spring)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit (3.171)
Prereq.: See description under subject 2.785J.
I. V. Yannas, M. Spector
3.98 Polymer Synthetic Chemistry
Prereq.: 3.062 or equivalent
G (Spring)
3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
An examination of the fundamental reaction
mechanisms and chemistry of polymerization
reactions with an emphasis on the synthesis of
new advanced polymers.
M. F. Rubner
-
U (lAP)
1-1-1
Metalsmiths in ancient Mexico cast large numbers of bells from copper and bronze. Subject
focuses on the technology of bell production
and the meaning of bell sounds and their uses
in ancient Mexican culture, through lectures
and laboratory work. Replicas of ancient
Mexican bells are made by copper smelting, alloying with tin, and lost-wax casting. Bell
sound qualities are measured and related to
materials properties and bell design characteristics. The ancient technology is compared
to that of modern bellmaking.
D. Hosler, S. M. Allen, L. W. Hobbs
3.981 Materials in Human Experience
Prereq.: -
U (Spring)
3-3-3 HASS
Examines the ways in which people in ancient
and preindustrial societies selected, evaluated,
and used materials of nature, transforming
them to objects of material culture. Some examples: concrete in Roman cities; cloth as
power in the Inca state; the weaponry of the
Crusades (Damascus steel). Explores ideological and aesthetic criteria often influential in
materials development. Laboratory/workshop
sessions provide hands-on experience with
materials discussed in class. Enrollment may
be limited. Alternate years.
D. Hosler, L. W. Hobbs, S. Allen
3.982 The Ancient Andean World
Prereq.: -
3.983 The Aztec, the Maya, and Their
Predecessors
Prereq.:
Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: U (Fall)
3-0-6 HASS
Examines development of Andean civilization
which culminated in the extraordinary empire
established by the Inca. Archaeological, ethnographic, and ethnohistorical approaches.
Particular attention to the unusual topography
of the Andean area, its influence upon local
ecology, and the characteristic social, political,
and technological responses of Andean
people to life in a topographically "vertical"
world. Characteristic cultural styles of prehistoric Andean life.
H. N. Lechtman
-
U (Fall)
3-0-6 HASS
Examines origins and florescence of the impressive pre-Hispanic civilizations in area encompassed by contemporary Mexico and
Guatemala using archaeological and ethnohistorical evidence. Considers factors such as distinct adaptive strategies demanded by the
lowland rainforest and the highland environments, extensive interregional exchange, and
sea trade with Central and South America in
explaining the spectacular achievements of
these indigenous American peoples.
D. Hosler
3.984 Materials in Ancient Societies: Metals
(Revised Units)
Prereq.: Permission of instructor
G (Fall)
3-6-3
The laboratory analysis of archaeological artifacts helps us understand the societies that
produced them. This seminar-laboratory subject provides in-depth study of the technologies ancient societies used to produce
metal objects from native and smelted metals.
Seminars cover basic physical metallurgy and
relate materials selection and processing to environment, exchange, aesthetics, political
power, and cultural values. Senior undergraduates may register for subject under a
Special Topics number; consult instructor.
H. N. Lechtman
3.985J Archaeological Science
(New)
(Same subject as 5.24J)
Prereq.: 3.091 or 5.11 or 8.01 or equivalent
U (Spring)
3-1-5 HASS
Pressing issues in archaeology as an
anthropological science. Stresses the natural
science and engineering methods archaeologists use to tackle them. Reconstructing time, space, and human ecologies
provides one focus; materials technologies
that transform natural materials to material culture provide another. Topics include 14C
dating, ice core and palynological analysis,
stable isotope chemistry of palaeodietary foodwebs, soil micromorphology and site formation, Pb isotope sourcing of metal artifacts,
and microstructural and mechanical analyses
of cementitious materials used in ancient
monumental buildings.
H. N. Lechtman, I. Oppenheim
332 Chapter Vill
