School of Engineering
6.061 Introduction to Electric Power
Systems
Prereq.: 6.002, 6.013
U (Spring)
3-0-9
Fundamentals of energy-handling electric circuits and electromechanical apparatus. Modeling of magnetic field devices and description of
their behavior using appropriate models.
Simplification of problems using transformation
techniques. Power electric circuits, magnetic
circuits, lumped parameter electromechanics,
elements of linear and rotating electric
machinery. Modeling of synchronous, induction, and dc machinery.
J. L. Kirtley, Jr.
6.070J Electronics Project Laboratory
(Same subject as SP.705J)
Prereq.: -
U (IAP, Spring)
2-2-2
Introduction to electronics test equipment such
as oscilloscopes, meters (voltage, resistance
inductance, capacitance, etc.), and signal generators. Hands-on format emphasizes individual instruction and development of skills,
such as soldering, assembly, and troubleshooting. Students build and keep an electronics kit,
such as AM-FM superhetrodyne radio, to
serve as the vehicle for learning about
electronics test and measurement equipment.
No previous background in electronics required.
J. K. Vandiver, B. D. Wedlock
6.071 Introduction to Electronics
Prereq.: 18.01, 8.02
U (Fall)
4-2-6 REST
Introductory subject suitable for students with
little or no previous background in electronics.
Elementary network theory, diode and transistor circuits, analysis and design of analog and
digital circuits. Examples emphasize uses of
electronics in experimental science. Alternate
week laboratory. 4 Engineering Design Points.
L. D. Braida, B. D. Wedlock
6.080J Practicum in Engineering Writing
and Oral Presentation-Quantitative
Physiology: Cells and Tissues
(Same subject as 21W.802J)
Prereq.: -
6.090-6.094 Special Subjects in Electrical
Engineering and Computer Science
Prereq.:
U (Fall)
2-0-4
See description under subject 21 W.802J.
T. F. Weiss, E. Barrett, D. M. Freeman
-
U (Fall, IAP, Spring)
Units arranged [P/D/F]
Can be repeated for credit
6.095-6.099 Special Subjects in Electrical
Engineering and Computer Science
Prereq.: -
U (Fall, IAP, Spring)
Units arranged
Can be repeated for credit
Basic undergraduate subjects not offered in
the regular curriculum. Consult Department to
learn of offerings for a particular term. Registration by permission of instructor.
A. C. Smith
Undergraduate Laboratory
Subjects
6.100 Electrical Engineering and Computer
Science Laboratory
Prereq.: -
6.111 Introductory Digital Systems
Laboratory
Prereq.: 6.002 or 6.071 or 16.040
U (Fall, Spring)
3-7-2 Institute LAB
Lectures and labs on digital logic, flipflops,
PALs, counters, timing, synchronization, finitestate machines and microprogrammed systems prepare students for the design and
implementation of a final project of their
choice, e.g., games, music, digital filters,
graphics, etc. Possible use of lab report for
Phase I of the Writing Requirement. Six extra
units possible via adding 6.919 after project
proposal. 12 Engineering Design Points.
J. L. Kirtley, Jr., D. E. Troxel
6.115 Microcomputer Project Laboratory
Prereq.: 6.111 or 6.004
U (Fall)
3-6-3
Students complete three projects involving
microprocessors. The first introduces basic
hardware, software, and development tools
and provides experience with interrupts, A/D
converters, communication, digital signal
processing and control. The second emphasizes planning, testing, and achieving
specific goals and involves a team effort to
U (Fall, Spring, Summer)
build a microprocessor system. The third, of
Units arranged
the student's choice, emphasizes creativity
Can be repeated for credit
and uniqueness. Lectures accompany the first
Individual experimental work related to electri- two projects and cover related material. 12 Encal engineering and computer science not gineering Design Points.
covered by other subjects. Student must make R. D. Thornton
arrangements with a project supervisor and file
a proposal endorsed by the supervisor. 6.121J Bioelectronics Project Laboratory
Departmental approval required. Written report
(Same subject as HST.575J)
to be submitted upon completion of work. If
Prereq.: 6.002 or 6.071
6.100 is used to satisfy Departmental
U (Spring)
Laboratory Requirement, student must register
2-8-2 Institute LAB
for 12 units of laboratory credit in the term the
work is done. Consult Department Under- Project Laboratory in electronic instrumentagraduate Office early in the term. tion, interfacing the analog and digital world.
A. C. Smith Students specify design, implement, and
evaluate biomedical instruments, including
6.101 Introductory Analog Electronics several interrelated analog and digital subsysLaboratory tems. Extensive use of integrated analog circuits and a microprocessor. Classroom
Prereq.: 6.002 or 6.071
development of analytic models for complex
U (Fall, Spring)
functional components and the measurement
2-9-1 Institute LAB
process in the context of a longitudinal
Introductory experimental laboratory focusing laboratory project. Written report will meet the
on the design and construction of analog requirements of Phase II writing. 12 Engineerelectronic circuits. Initial lectures and ing Design Points.
laboratory projects investigate the perfor- S. K. Bums, R. G. Mark
mance and characteristics of discrete and integrated-circuit components. Design and 6.151 Semiconductor Devices Project
implementation of independent project. Laboratory
Provides opportunity to focus on real-world
Prereq.: 6.152J
problems with complex objectives and soluU (Spring)
tions that involve tradeoffs and the use of en-
0-12-0 Institute LAB
gineering judgement. 12 Engineering Design
Points. Student use of the Microelectronics Laboratory
B. M. Roscoe facilities for individual or team projects in the
area of design, fabrication, modeling, and characterization of individual MOS or bipolar
devices, microsensors or microactuators, and
integrated circuits using these devices. Each
term, the project topics are selected to fit the
general areas of development in the
Laboratory. Enrollment limited. 12 Engineering
Design Points.
M. A. Schmidt, C. G. Sodini
352 Chapter Vill
