School of Architecture and Planning
4.381, 4.382 Advanced Visual Design 4.401 Introduction to Building Technology
Prereq.: Permission of instructor Prereq.:
G (Fall, Spring)
0-9-12 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit
individual concepts, projects, design, and execution of installations, objects, and events in
environmental art and performance involving
elemental and science-technology means and
media.
Staff
4.385-4.387 Special Problems in
Environmental Art
Prereq.: Permission of instructor
G (Fall, Spring)
Units arranged H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit
Special work on an individual or group basis
using specific means such as video, holography, and multimedia. Registration subject to
prior arrangement of subject matter and supervision by staff.
Staff
4.388 Preparation for S.M.Vis.S. Thesis
Prereq.: Permission of instructor
G (Fall, Spring)
Units arranged [P/D/F] H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Selection of thesis topic, definition of method
of approach, and preparation of thesis
proposal. Independent study supplemented by
individual conference with faculty.
E. Levine
4.391-4.393 Special Problems in Visual Arts
Prereq.: 4.301
U (Fall, Spring)
Units arranged
Can be repeated for credit
4.394 Special Problems in Visual Arts
Prereq.: Permission of instructor
U (Fall, IAP, Spring)
Units arranged [P/ DIF]
Can be repeated for credit
4.395-4.397 Special Problems in Visual Arts
Prereq.: Permission of instructor
G (Fall, Spring)
Units arranged H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit
4.398, 4.399 Special Problems in Visual Arts
Prereq.: 4.301, 4.322
G (Fall, IAP, Spring)
Units arranged [P/D/F] H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit
Supplementary work on individual or group
basis. Registration subject to prior arrangement for subject matter and supervision by
staff.
E. Levine
-
U (Spring)
3-3-6
Explores the application of building technology
to architecture through considerations of building construction-materials and methodsand systems-structure, enclosure, climate
and utility services, light, acoustics, fire safety,
and accessibility. Includes lectures, laboratory
exercises, site visits, and problem sets, but emphasizes a semester-long student investigation
of a precedent building, culminating in a term
paper.
Building Technology Staff
4.405 Materials and Construction
Prereq.: -
4.42J Fundamentals of Energy in Buildings
(Same subject as 1.42J, 2.45J)
Prereq.: 8.02, 18.02
U (Fall)
3-0-9 REST
Introduction to energy fundamentals important
to buildings. Conservation of energy. Properties of pure substances, gas mixtures,
psychrometrics. Heat pumps and refrigeration
cycles, limiting thermodynamic performance.
Heat transfer within buildings and major components. Several creative design projects are
assigned.
L. R. Glicksman
4.425 Energy in Building Design
Prereq.: Permission of instructor
G (Spring)
G (Fall) 3-1-5
3-1-5
Explores aspects of thermal phenomena, therMaterials and methods of construction are es- mal comfort, and climate relevant to building
sential elements for the built realization of design, and applies concepts and methods to
design. Knowledge of the inherent as well as energy-efficient building design. Topics include
potential properties of building materials is ap- thermodynamics, psychrometrics, comfort, inplied to selected contemporary construction door air quality and air distribution, solar radiatypes and current processes of construction. tion, climate, space heating and cooling loads,
Understanding of the integration of materials and lighting. Emphasizes a quantitative underas functioning built form is fostered in lectures, standing of energy fundamentals; examples
case studies, and field trips. Attention is paid from practice, and design exercises.
to the importance of working details as part of Q. Chen
a techncially coordinated whole. Several short
exercises to test the student's skill in applying 4.426 Energy, Environment, and Buildings
theory to practice. Workshop
Building Technology Staff
Prereq.: 4.425
Acad Year 1996-97: G (Spring)
4.408, 4.409 Special Problems in Building
Acad Year 1997-98: Not offered
Construction
4-2-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Prereq.: Permission of instructor
Builds on an understanding of energy funG (Fall, Spring)
damentals by treating in depth one or more
Units arranged H-LEVEL Grad Credit
aspects of the influence of building design on
Can be repeated for credit
energy use. Stresses life-cycle energy, includSupplementary work on individual or group ing energy embodied in building materials, curbasis. Registration subject to prior arrange- rent information on material selection and its
ment for subject matter and supervision by effect on indoor air quality, and the flow of
staff. energy and materials across the building enBuilding Technology Staff velope. Case studies and a significant design
exercise.
4.411 Building Technology Laboratory L. K. Norford
Prereq.: 8.02, 18.02
4.427J Analysis and Design of Heating, U (Fall)
Ventilating, and Air Conditioning Systems
2-4-6 Institute LAB
(New)
Concepts of building technology and ex-
(Same subject as 2.46J)
perimental methods explored in a laboratory Prereq.: 2.005, 2.51
setting. Experimental projects include measureG (Fall)
ment of thermally driven airflows in model
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
buildings, investigation of lighting intensity and
glare, design and test of daylighting and pas- Explores the fundamentals of heating, ventilatsive solar strategies in model buildings, meas- ing, and air-conditioning (HVAC) systems. Disurements of heat flow and thermal storage, cussion of psychrometrics, air conditioning
and structural inquiry including load-deforma- processes, thermal comfort, indoor air quality
tion of materials, structural elements, and struc- and outdoor design conditions; concentration
tural systems. Computers used for data on the calculation of heating and cooling load
acquisitions, analysis, and simulation. in order to size suitable HVAC equipment; esL. K. Norford timation of energy consumption of the HVAC
equipment. Introduces both manual and computer methods. One site visit.
Q. Chen
340 Chapter Vill
