School of Architecture and Planning
4.205 Foundations of Design and
Computation
Prereq.: Permission of instructor
G (Fall)
Units arranged H-LEVEL Grad Credit
An introduction to the computational treatment
of design problems and processes. Presents
basic theoretical ideas and provides an overview of the relevant literature. Gives particular
attention to shape description, shape computation, shape grammars, and shape languages.
W. J. Mitchell
4.206 Visualization
(Revised Units)
Prereq.: -
4.210 Light, Color, and Computer Graphics 4.221 Architecture Studies Faculty
Colloquium
Prereq.: 4.203 or 4.206
G (Spring) Prereq.: Permission of instructor
3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit G (Fall)
Units arranged [P/D/F]
Introduction to the effects of light and color in
Can be repeated for credit
architecture. Applies computer graphics as the
primary medium, along with direct observation, Required subject for all first-year S.M.Arch.S.
basic mathematical analysis, and other forms students. Weekly presentations by faculty on a
of representation, to help understand the com- selected theme followed by discussion. Replex and interconnected nature of these quirements include active student participation
phenomena. Examines the distinction between and a final paper reviewing the general
natural and artificial light, the related topic of theoretical issues raised by the theme and by
energy consumption, the color of light, and the each faculty presentation.
role of all of these in the shaping of buildings. Staff
Also covers the relevant computer graphics
techniques. Open to qualified undergraduates. 4.222 Aspects of Office Practice
J. Dorsey
U (Fall) Prereq.: Permission of instructor
3-0-9 G (Fall)
4.214J Advanced Topics in Computer
2-0-4 [P/D/F] H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Explores the role of computer visualization as Graphics
a representational medium. Emphasizes the (New) An in-depth overview of the practice of arvisualization of light, color, surfaces, textures, chitecture. Structured to convey the myriad of
(Same subject as 6.838J)
volumes, scientific data, buildings, landscapes, concerns and methodology associated with arPrereq.: 6.837 or 4.210
and terrains, and introduces basic animation chitectural project development. Introduces the
G (Spring)
techniques. Real and imaginary environments student to the broad range of issues from of-
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
are constructed, probed, and displayed. Also fice organization to steps and sequences recovers the relevant computer graphics In-depth study of an active research topic in quired to facilitate, administer, and carry
methods. computer graphics. Topics change each term. through an architectural project. Explores the
J. Dorsey Readings from the literature, student presenta- architect's role as designer, project manager,
tions, short assignments, and a programming contact with client from predesign through con-
4.207 Advanced Topics in Design and project. struction. Explores the expanding role of comComputation J. Dorsey puters in architectural practice. Combines
classroom discussions with site visits to
Prereq.: Permission of instructor 4.218, 4.219 Special Problems in Urban several architectural offices.
G (Fall, Spring) Housing H. P. Portnoy
Units arranged H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit Prereq.: Permission of instructor
4.228, 4.229 Architectural Design
G (Fall, Spring)
Provides an opportunity for detailed explora- Seminar
Units arranged H-LEVEL Grad Credit
tion of selected advanced topics in design and
Can be repeated for credit Prereq.: 4.126
computation. Supplementary work on in- G (Fall, Spring)
dividual or group basis. Registration subject to Supplementary work on individual or group
Units arranged H-LEVEL Grad Credit
prior arrangement for subject matter and super- basis. Registration subject to prior arrangeCan be repeated for credit
vision by staff. ment for subject matter and supervision by
W. J. Mitchell staff. Inquiries and/or explorations into a research
M. Dennis, R. Goethert, R. Strickland topic related to architectural design taught in a
4.208, 4.209 Special Problems in seminar format. The work may supply the
Computation and Architecture 4.220 Urban Housing: Paris, London, basis for an architectural design workshop
New York and/or studio and/or lead a research proposal
Prereq.: Permission of instructor and/or publication.
G (Fall, Spring) Prereq.: Permission of instructor Architectural Design Staff
Units arranged H-LEVEL Grad Credit G (Fall, Spring)
Can be repeated for credit 3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
4.23J Special Interest Group in Urban
Can be repeated for credit
Supplementary work on individual or group Settlements: SIGUS Workshops
basis. Registration subject to prior arrange- Analysis of the development of housing
(Same subject as 11.465J)
ment for subject matter and supervision by models and their urban implications in Paris,
Prereq.: Permission of instructor
staff. London, and New York City from the seven- G (Fall, IAP, Spring)
Staff teenth century to the present. Focus on the
Units arranged [P/D/F] H-LEVEL Grad Credit
French hotel, London row house, and New
Can be repeated for credit
York City tenement and apartment building;
twentieth-century housing reform movements Interactive interdisciplinary workshops which
and work by the London County Council, focus on projects and practices on urban settleCIAM, and American public housing agencies. ment issues in developing countries
M. Dennis, R. Strickland throughout the world. Participation by guest
practitioners.
R. Goethert, R. A. Gakenheimer, B. Sanyal
336 Chapter Vill
