Department of Architecture Course 4
4.616 Cultural Signification in Architecture 4.623 Technology and the Modern Project
Prereq.: Permission of instructor Prereq.: Permission of instructor
Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered Acad Year 1996-97: G (Fall, Spring)
Acad Year 1997-98: G (Spring) Acad Year 1997-98: Not offered
Units arranged H-LEVEL Grad Credit 3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Seminar on the issue of meaning in architec- Introduces technology as a historical, cultural,
ture. Establishes historical and theoretical and philosophical problem integral to the
frameworks for investigations. Analyzes tradi- project of modernity. Reviews aesthetic,
tions, transformations, and inventions in ar- ideological, and epistemological appropriations
chitecture as a conveyor of messages that of technology in the architectural culture of the
transcend the stylistic, formal, and nineteenth and twentieth centuries, from
iconographic domains to include an assess- "house-machines" to "virtual space." Focuses
ment of some of the political, ideological, so- on the significance and status of technology in
cial, and cultural concerns of the builders and the critical debates concerning modernity
patrons both synchronically and diachronically.
Critically reviews the methodologies and
theoretical premises of studies on meaning
and iconography in architecture.
N. Rabbat
4.617 Issues in Islamic Urbanism
Prereq.: Permission of instructor
G (Spring)
Units arranged H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit
Seminar on selected topics from Islamic urban
history. Examines patterns of urbanization and
architectural production in several cities. Discusses the leading factors in shaping civic
forms and structures. Critically reviews the
body of literature concerned with the Islamic
City. Research paper required. Open to
qualified undergraduates.
N. Rabbat
4.621 Orientalism and Representation
Prereq.: Permission of instructor
G (Fall)
Units arranged H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Seminar on the politics of knowledge, i.e., how
political and ideological attitudes, concerns,
and biases inform, and sometimes dictate, the
representation, codification, and reproduction
of knowledge. Critically reviews selected texts,
illustrations, and institutional traditions which
have been influential and/or paradigmatic in
shaping the concepts and images of the Islamic Orient. Challenges the tacit assumptions
and biases of the Orientalist conventions, and
of the more recent essentialist trends in representing Islam. Research paper required.
S. Bozdogan, N. Rabbat
-
4.627 Special Problems in Islamic and
Nonwestern Architecture
Prereq.: Permission of instructor
U (Fall, Spring)
Units arranged
Can be repeated for credit
4.628, 4.629 Special Problems in Islamic
and Nonwestern Architecture
Prereq.: Permission of instructor
G (Fall, Spring)
Units arranged H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit
Supplementary work on individual or group
between dwelling and transience, between basis in the history, theory, and criticism of aralienation and liberation, between critical chitecture and urban form in the Islamic World.
programs of resistance to instrumental Registration subject to prior arrangement for
rationality and radical programs to extend the subject matter and supervision by staff.
modern project further. S. Bozdogan, N. Rabbat
S. Bozdogan
4.635 Renaissance Architecture
4.624 Architecture and Modernization in the
Prereq.: 4.605
Middle East, 19th and 20th Centuries
Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Prereq.: Permission of instructor Acad Year 1997-98: U (Fall)
G (Fall, Spring) 3-0-6 HASS
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
A history of the architecture of the fifteenth and
A historical survey of important architectural sixteenth centuries in Italy. The formation and
and urban transformations in the Middle East development of the classical style, drawing
from the nineteenth century modernizing and model making, the relationship between
reforms in the Ottoman Empire to the current architecture and the fine arts, buildings and
crisis of secular nationalisms and the emer- their patrons, architectural theory, architecture
gence of Islam as a contending project of and politics.
civilization. Lectures cover such topics as the D. H. Friedman
transformation of architectural education and
practice, the introduction of modern architec- 4.638 Advanced Study in Renaissance
ture and planning, the work of western ar- Architecture
chitects and firms, the emergence of
nationalist, regionalist, and Islamicist discour- Prereq.: Permission of instructor
ses. Related readings for discussion. G (Fall or Spring)
S. Bozdogan Units arranged H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit
4.626 Architecture and Post-Colonial Seminar on a selected topic from Renaissance
Identity architecture. Requires original research and
(Revised Content) presentation of oral and written reports.
D. H. Friedman
Prereq.: Permission of instructor
G (Spring)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit 4.639 Advanced Study in 16th-, 17th-, and
18th-Century Architecture
Addresses the role of architecture in the
making of modern national identities in the late Prereq.: Permission of instructor
G (Fall) nineteenth and twentieth centuries. Focuses
on construction and symbolism of national Units arranged H-LEVEL Grad Credit
styles in architecture in Europe and in Can be repeated for credit
colonial/post-colonial contexts outside Europe. Seminar on a selected topic from architecture
Investigates the complex interplay of the of the period. Requires original research and
utopic and universalist visions of twentieth cen- presentation of oral and written reports.
tury modernism and the cultural and political H. A. Millon
expressions of nationhood through appropriation of history and/or vernacular traditions.
Readings of key texts on nationalism, modernity, and identity.
S. Bozdogan
Descriptions of Subjects 343
