Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science Course 6
6.152J Microelectronics Processing
Technology
(Same subject as 3.155J, 10.480J)
Prereq.: Permission of instructor
U (Fall, Spring)
3-4-5
Introduces the theory and technology of integrated-circuit fabrication. Lectures and
laboratory sessions on basic processing techniques such as diffusion, oxidation, epitaxy,
photolithography, chemical vapor deposition,
and plasma etching. Emphasis on the interrelationships between material properties,
device structure, and the electrical behavior of
devices. Provides background for thesis work
in microelectronics or for 6.151. 6 Engineering
Design Points.
M. A. Schmidt, C. G. Sodini, H. H. Sawin,
C. V. Thompson, K. K. Gleason, L. C. Kimerling
6.161 Modern Optics Project Laboratory
Prereq.: 6.003, 6.013
U (Fall)
2-8-2 Institute LAB
Lectures, laboratory exercises, and projects in
modern optics. Topics: polarization properties
of light, reflection and refraction, coherence
and interference, Fraunhofer and Fresnel diffraction, imaging and transforming properties
of lenses, spatial filtering, coherent optical
processors, holography, optical properties of
materials, lasers, nonlinear optics, electrooptic and acousto-optic materials and devices,
optical detectors, fiber optics, and optical communication. Seniors may use this laboratory to
find an advanced undergraduate project. 12
Engineering Design Points.
C. Warde
6.163 Strobe Project Laboratory
Prereq.: -
6.182 Psychoacoustics Project Laboratory
Prereq.: --
Acad Year 1996-97: U (Spring)
Acad Year 1997-98: Not offered
3-4-5 Institute LAB
Introduces the methods used to measure
human auditory abilities. Discusses auditory
function, principles of psychoacoustic measurement, models for psychoacoustic performance,
and experimental techniques. Project topics:
absolute and differential auditory sensitivity,
operating characteristics of human observers,
span of absolute judgment, adaptive measurement procedures, scaling sensory magnitudes.
Oral presentation and written report.
Knowledge of probability helpful. Alternate
years. 12 Engineering Design Points.
L. D. Braida
6.190-6.194 Special Laboratory Subjects in
Electrical Engineering and Computer
Science
Prereq.:
U (Fall, Spring)
2-8-2 Institute LAB
A project laboratory for experiments, dealing
mainly with the characteristics of electronic
flash sources of light and their applications to
photography and measurement problems. A
program of experimentation concerned with
electronic flash, organized with each group of
students at the start of the term. 12 Engineering Design Points.
C. H. Mazel
6.170 Laboratory in Software Engineering
Prereq.: 6.001
U (Spring)
3-9-3
Introduces concepts and techniques relevant
to the production of large software systems.
Students taught a programming method based
on the recognition and description of useful
abstractions. Topics: programming methodology; procedural, data, and control abstractions; specifications; design methods, and
testing. Several programming projects of varying size undertaken by students working singly
and in groups. 12 Engineering Design Points.
B. H. Liskov
-
U (Fall, IAP, Spring)
Units arranged [P/D/F]
Can be repeated for credit
6.195-6.198 Special Laboratory Subjects in
Electrical Engineering and Computer
Science
Prereq.: -
U (Fall, IAP, Spring)
Units arranged
Can be repeated for credit
Laboratory subjects not offered in the regular
curriculum. Consult Department to learn of offerings for a particular term. Registration by
permission of instructor.
A. C. Smith
6.199 Advanced Undergraduate Project
Prereq.: -
Advanced Undergraduate
Subjects and Graduate
Subjects by Area
Systems Science and Control
Engineering
6.231 Dynamic Programming and
Stochastic Control
Prereq.: 6.041 or 18.313 or 18.440 or 18.100
G (Fall)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Sequential decision making via dynamic
programming. Unified approach to optimal control of stochastic dynamic systems and
Markovian decision problems. Applications in
linear-quadratic control, inventory control,
resource allocation models. Optimal decision
making under perfect and imperfect state information. Certainty equivalent and open loopfeedback control, self-tuning controllers.
Infinite horizon problems, successive approximation, policy iteration. Discounted
problems, stochastic shortest path problems,
average cost problems. Optimal stopping,
scheduling, and control of queues. Approximations and neurodynamic programming.
D. P. Bertsekas
6.241 Dynamic Systems and Control
Prereq.: 6.003, 18.06
G (Fall)
4-0-8 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Linear, discrete- and continuous-time, multiinput-output systems in control, related areas.
Least squares and matrix perturbation
problems. State-space models, modes,
stability, controllability, observability, transfer
U (Fall, IAP, Spring) function matrices, poles and zeros, minimality.
0-12-0 Internal stability of interconnected systems,
Research project for those students complet- feedback compensators, state feedback, oping the S.B. degree; to be arranged by the stu- timal regulation, observers, observer-based
dent and an appropriate MIT faculty member. compensators. Measures of control perforStudents who register for this subject must con- mance, robustness issues using singular
sult Department Undergraduate Office. Stu- values of transfer functions. Introductory ideas
dents who are completing a project that was on nonlinear systems. Recommended prereqoriginally started as 6.ThU must register under uisite: 6.302.
that subject number. M. A. Dahleh, G. C. Verghese
A. C. Smith
6.242 Advanced Linear Control
Systems
Prereq.: 18.06, 6.241
Acad Year 1996-97: G (Fall)
Acad Year 1997-98: Not offered
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit
Introduction to uncertain multivariable control
systems, modeling assumptions and objectives. Stability of linear time invariant systems,
coprime factorization, parametrization of all
stabilizing compensators. Design using H , H.
2
L' -optimization. Stability and performance
robustness in the presence of structured uncertainty. Special topics. Alternate years.
M. A. Dahleh
Descriptions of Subjects 353
