Electrical Engineering and
Computer Science
For degree requirements, see listing in
Chapter VII under the School of
Engineering.
Basic Undergraduate
Subjects
6.001 Structure and Interpretation of
Computer Programs
Prereq.: -
School of Engineering
Course 6
6.004 Computation Structures 6.013 Electromagnetic Fields and Energy
Prereq.: 6.001, 6.002 Prereq.: 6.002, 8.02
U (Fall, Spring) U (Fall)
4-3-8 4-0-8
Introduces architecture of digital systems, em- Maxwell's equations and the Lorentz force law.
phasizing structural principles common to a Quasistatic forms of Maxwell's equations.
wide range of technologies. Multilevel im- Studies of electro-quasistatic fields and their
U (Fall, Spring) plementation strategies; definition of new primi- sources through solutions of Poisson's and
5-3-7 REST tives (e.g., gates, instructions, procedures, Laplace's equations. Steady conduction and
processes) and their mechanization using polarization. Charge relaxation. MagnetoControl of complexity in large programming
systems. 1) Building abstractions: computation- lower-level elements. Analysis of potential con- quasistatic approximation; magnetic boundary
currency; precedence constraints and perfor- value problems, magnetization, induction, cural processes; higher-order procedures; commance measures; pipelined and rent induced in stationary and moving conducpound data; data abstractions. 2) Controlling
multidimensional systems. Instruction set tors. Electric and magnetic forces derived from
interactions: generic operations; self-describdesign issues; architectural support for contem- energy. Electromagnetic waves. Extensive use
ing data; message passing; streams and inporary software structures. 4 Engineering of engineering examples.
finite data structures. 3) Meta-linguistic
Design Points. A. J. Grodzinsky
abstraction: interpretation of programming lanS. A. Ward
guages; machine model; compilation; embedded languages. Substantial weekly 6.014 Electrodynamics
programming assignments are an integral part 6.011 Introduction to Communication, Prereq.: 6.002; 8.02 or 8.022 or 8.02X
of the course. Enrollment may be limited. 4 En- Control, and Signal Processing U (Spring)
gineering Design Points. Prereq.: 6.003, 6.041 4-0-8
W. E. L. Grimson, R. A. Brooks U (Fall, Spring)
Plane waves in three dimensions; radiation
4-0-8
from elementary electric dipoles, current dis-
6.002 Circuits and Electronics
Input-output and state-space models of linear tributions, and arrays; diffraction and interPrereq.: 8.02 or 8.022; 18.03or 18.06 systems driven by deterministic and random ference. Waves on continuous transmission
U (Fall, Spring) signals; time- and transform-domain repre- lines, periodic structures, and dielectric and
4-2-9 REST sentations. Sampling, discrete-time processing metallic waveguides; propagation and evanesof continuous-time signals. State feedback, ob- cence; energy flow and impedance matching.
Fundamentals of lumped networks, resistive
servers. Probabilistic models; stochastic Phase and group velocity. Natural frequencies
elements and networks, energy storage eleprocesses, correlation functions, power and modes of closed electromagnetic strucments, dynamics of first- and second-order netspectra, whitening filters. Detection; matched tures; coupling to resonant structures. Exworks, network equivalence theorems,
filters. Least-mean square error estimation; amples taken from the fields of quasistatics,
electronic devices, circuits, and applications.
Wiener filtering. acoustics, optics, and microwaves.
Design exercises. Alternate week laboratory.
A. V. Oppenheim, G. C. Verghese J. A. Kong, D. H. Staelin
Students with appropriate experience in
electronic circuits may treat the 8.02 prerequisite as a corequisite. Enrollment may be 6.012 Electronic Devices and Circuits 6.021J Quantitative Physiology:
limited. 4 Engineering Design Points. Prereq.: 6.003, 8.02 Cells and Tissues
J. K. Roberge U (Fall, Spring) (Subject meets with 2.791J, 2.794J, 6.521J,
4-0-8 HST.541J)
6.003 Signals and Systems Prereq.: 2.003 or 6.002 or 6.071 or 10.301;
Modeling of electronic devices and analysis of
Prereq.: 6.001, 6.002 nonlinear circuits. Physical electronics of semi- 8.02, 18.03
U (Fall)
U (Fall, Spring) conductor junction and MOS devices. Relation
5-2-5
4-2-9 of electrical behavior to internal physical
processes; development of circuit models; un- Principles of mass transport and electrical sigLaplace transform and its applications to netderstanding limitations of models. Application nal generation for biological membranes, cells,
works and electronic systems including feedof incremental and large-signal techniques for and tissues. Mass transport through
back. Description of linear time-invariant
analyzing circuits containing nonlinear devices. membranes: diffusion, osmosis, chemically
systems in the time and frequency domains;
Analysis of bipolar and field effect transistor cir- mediated, and active transport. Electric properconvolution, Fourier series and integrals. Uncuits, with examples chosen from single-ended ties of cells: ion transport; equilibrium, resting,
certainty relations and sampling theorems. Disand differential amplifiers, logic inverters, and and action potentials. Kinetic and molecular
crete-time systems and signals. Applications to
other integrated circuits. Design project. 4 En- properties of single voltage-gated ion chananalog and digital filtering systems and
gineering Design Points. nels. Laboratory and computer exercises ilmodulation systems. 4 Engineering Design
C. G. Fonstad, Jr. lustrate the concepts. For juniors and seniors.
Points.
Meets with graduate subject 6.521J, but asJ. K. White
signments differ. Students interested in enhancing their written and oral presentation
skills, see subject 6.080J. 4 Engineering
Design Points.
T. F. Weiss, D. M. Freeman
350 Chapter Vill
