School of Science
Course 5 Chemistry
For degree requirements, see listing in
Chapter VII under the School of Science.
5.UR Undergraduate Research
Prereq.: -
U (Fall, Spring)
Units arranged [P/D/F]
Can be repeated for credit
5.URG Undergraduate Research
Prereq.: -
5.061 Principles of Organometallic 5.07 Biological Chemistry
Chemistry
Prereq.: 5.12
(New)
U (Fall)
Prereq.: 5.03, 5.04 5-0-7 REST
G (Fall) Credit cannot also be received for 7.05
2-0-4 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Description of the organization and functioning
A comprehensive treatment of organometallic of living organisms in terms of molecular strucchemistry of the transition metals with an em- tures and processes. Chemical and physical
U (Fall, Spring)
phasis on catalysis and mechanisms. properties of cell and tissue constituents, inUnits arranged R. R. Schrock cluding carbohydrates, lipids, nucleic acids,
Can be repeated for credit
and proteins. Origin of catalysis in biological
Program of research to be arranged by the stu- 5.062 Principles of Bioinorganic Chemistry systems. Metabolic synthesis and degradation
dent and a departmental faculty member. (New) of amino acids, carbohydrates, fats, and
Department Coordinator: K. A. Nelson. origins and fates of macromolecules as well as
Prereq.: 5.03 chemical bases of regulation and integration of
G (Fall) metabolic phenomena.
5.03 Principles of Inorganic Chemistry I
2-0-4 H-LEVEL Grad Credit A. Klibanov, L. Stern
Prereq.: 5.12
Choice, uptake, assembly of metal-containing
U (Spring)
units; control and use of metalions; metal fold- 5.071J Biochemistry Laboratory
4-0-8
ing and cross-linking of biomolecules; electron-
(Subject meets with HST.415.J, TOX.209)
Presents principles of chemical bonding and transfer proteins; substrate bindings and Prereq.: 5.07, and 5.310 or 5.311
molecular structure, and their application to activation; atom and group transfer chemistry;
U (Spring)
the chemistry of representative elements of protein tuning of metal properties in biology;
2-8-2
the periodic system. frontiers of bioinorganic chemistry.
A. Davison, R. R. Schrock S. J. Lippard Introduces experimental biochemistry techniques in four modules centered on the study of
5.04 Principles of Inorganic Chemistry I1 5.068 Physical Methods in Inorganic the enzyme P-galactosidase. Protein purificaChemistry tion and enzyme kinetics are combined with
Prereq.: 5.03 basic molecular biology techniques that are esU (Fall) Prereq.: 5.03 sential for modern protein biochemistry. The
4-0-8 Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered four modules are 1) enzyme purification;
Acad Year 1997-98: G (Spring) 2) gene cloning; 3) site-directed mutagenesis;
Systematic presentation of the chemical ap- 3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
plications of group theory. Emphasis is placed 4) enzyme kinetics. Kinetic analysis of wild
on the formal development of the subject and Introduction to physical methods and their ap- type and mutant enzymes with substrates and
applications to determine the infrared and plication to inorganic chemical compounds. In- inhibitors performed. Meets with graduate subelectronic spectra, magnetic properties, struc- cludes diffraction methods; electronic ject TOX 209, but assignments differ.
ture, and other features of transition metal photoelectron spectroscopy; vibrational and J. Williamson, P. Dedon
complexes amenable to theoretical analysis. rotational spectroscopy; magnetic measureElementary crystallography and space group ments; including magnetic and electron spin 5.11 Principles of Chemical Science
theory. 5.61 background encouraged. resonance; M6ssbauer spectroscopy; mass
Prereq.:
C. C. Cummins spectrometry; electrochemical measurements.
Case histories, with the complementary use of
5.05 Principles of Inorganic Chemistry III selections of the various methods described.
A. Davison
Prereq.: 5.03, 5.04
G (Spring)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Extended treatment of some special topics of
current interest in modern inorganic chemistry.
The material is presented in two parts. The
first part is a comprehensive overview of solidstate inorganic chemistry; the second part emphasizes main group chemistry.
D. Seyferth, H. zur Loye
-
U (Fall, Spring)
5-0-7 CHEMISTRY
Introduction to chemistry, with emphasis on
basic principles and their applications. Includes atomic and molecular electronic structure, thermodynamics, acid-base and redox
equilibria, chemical kinetics, reaction
mechanisms, catalysis, and aspects of metal
coordination chemistry and organic chemistry.
Fall Term: R. W. Field, R. J. Silbey, Staff
Spring Term: A. M. Klibanov, W. H. OrmeJohnson
346 Chapter Vill
