Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science Course 6
Computer Science
6.801 Machine Vision
Prereq.: 6.003 or permission of instructor
U (Fall)
3-0-9
Deriving a symbolic description of the environment from an image. Understanding physics of
image formation. Image analysis as an inversion problem. Binary image processing and filtering of images as preprocessing steps.
Recovering shape, lightness, orientation, and
rnotion. Using constraints to reduce the ambiguity. Photometric stereo and extended
Gaussian sphere. Applications to robotics; intelligent interaction of machines with their environment.
B. K. P. Horn
6.805J Ethics and the Law on the Electronic
Frontier
(Same subject as STS.085J)
Prereq.: -
6.823 Computer System Architecture 6.836 Embodied Intelligence
(New)
Prereq.: 6.004 or equivalent
G (Spring) Prereq.: 6.034, 18.03, 18.06
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit G (Spring)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Emphasizes the relationship among technology, hardware organization, and programming Studies how to build intelligent systems that
systems in the evolution of computer architec- have physical embodiment. Examines specific
ture. Technology constraints, machine or- problems, historical solutions, and contemganization, instruction set architecture, 1/O and porary research into the area of autonomous
memory system design, addressing structures embodied systems. Topics: dynamical modeland memory management, and their impact on ing of agent/environment interaction; neural
performance and programmability; design and modeling of perception and action systems; isprogramming of pipelined processors, vector sues in vision and robotics; evolutionary modelprocessors, and parallel computers. Assumes ing techniques; behavior-based approaches;
an undergraduate knowledge of computer sys- pre-cognitive and cognitive architectures. Extems. 4 Engineering Design Points. amines problems and sources of simplification
Arvind, W. J. Dally presented by a physically embodied system
relative to unembodied intelligence.
6.826 Principles of Computer Systems R. A. Brooks
Prereq.: Permission of instructor 6.837 Computer Graphics
G (Spring)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit Prereq.: 6.046J, 18.06
G (Fall)
An introduction to the basic principles of com- 3-0-9
Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered puter systems with emphasis on the use of
Acad Year 1997-98: U (Fall) rigorous techniques as an aid to under- Introduction to computer graphics hardware, al-
3-0-9 HASS standing and building modern computing sys- gorithms, and software. Topics include line
tems. Particular attention paid to concurrent generators, affine transformations, line and
Studies the growth of computer and com- and distributed systems. Topics include polygon clipping, splines, interactive technimunications technology and the new legal and specification and verification, concurrent algo- ques, perspective projection, solid modeling,
ethical challenges that reflect tensions be- rithms, synchronization mechanisms, naming, hidden surface algorithms, lighting models,
tween individual rights and societal needs. communication protocols, replication techni- shading, and animation. Substantial programTopics: computer crime; intellectual property ques (including distributed cache manage- ming experience required. 2 Engineering
restrictions on software; encryption, privacy, ment), and principles and algorithms for Design Points.
and national security; academic freedom and achieving reliability. S. Teller
free speech. Students meet and question tech- W. E. Weihl
nologists, activists, law enforcement agents, 6.838J Advanced Topics in Computer
journalists, and legal experts. Extensive use of
6.835 Concurrent Systems for Artificial Graphics
World Wide Web for readings and other
Intelligence (New)
materials. Enrollment limited.
H. Abelson, M. Fischer Prereq.: 6.001, 6.034 (Same subject as 4.214J)
Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered Prereq.: 6.837 or 4.210
6.821 Programming Languages Acad Year 1997-98: G (Fall) G (Spring)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit 3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Prereq.: Permission of instructor
G (Fall) Concurrent systems and their relationship to ar- In-depth study of an active research topic in
4-0-8 H-LEVEL Grad Credit tificial intelligence. Organizations as exemplars computer graphics. Topics change each term.
of highly intelligent parallel systems. Concur- Readings from the literature, student presentaPrinciples of functional, imperative, and logic rent architectures for artificial intelligence (e.g., tions, short assignments, and a programming
programming languages. Meta-circular inter- Apiary, Connection Machine, and parallel project.
preters, semantics (operational and denotation- Prolog machines). Incrementally evolving net- J. Dorsey
al), type systems (polymorphism, inference, works of computers. Mathematical models of
and abstract types), object oriented program- concurrent systems (e.g., Actor Model, 6.840J Theory of Computation
ming, modules, multiprocessing. Case studies Milner's algebraic model, and Hoare's process
of contemporary programming languages. model). Alternate years. (Same subject as 18.404J)
Programming experience and background in C. E. Hewitt Prereq.: 6.046J or 6.851
language implementation required. G (Fall)
D. K. Gifford 4-0-8 (H except XVIII)
See description under subject 18.404J.
S. Goldwasser, M. Karchmer
6.841J Advanced Complexity Theory
(Same subject as 18.405J)
Prereq.: 6.840J
G (Spring)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
See description under subject 18.405J.
S. Goldwasser, M. Sipser
Descriptions of Subjects 361
