Department of Architecture Course 4
4.428, 4.429 Special Problems in Energy in 4.442 Introduction to Building Structural 4.453 Building Technology in Real Estate
Buildings Systems 11 Decision Making
Prereq.: Permission of instructor Prereq.: 4.441 Prereq.:
G (Fall, Spring) G (Fall)
Units arranged H-LEVEL Grad Credit 3-0-6
Can be repeated for credit
A continuation of 4.441, subject completes the
Supplementary work on individual or group exploration of structural elements: column
basis. Registration subject to prior arrange- buckling, frame analysis, and funicular strucment for subject matter and supervision by tures: arches, cables. Discussion includes:
staff. bending as a form generator; review of overall
L. R. Glicksman, L. K. Norford strategies for load carrying, both vertically and
laterally; how load-carrying strategies are im-
4.43 Architectural Acoustics plemented in systems; and how these systems
are designed.
Prereq.: 4.401 Building Technology Staff
U (Fall)
3-0-6 4.446 Structures Design Workshop
Describes interactions between people and
Prereq.: 4.442
sound, indoors and outdoors, and uses this inG (Spring)
formation to develop acoustical design criteria
2-4-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
for architecture and planning. Physical principles of sound generation, propagation, and Advanced methods of structural analysis in the
reception. Properties of materials for sound ab- development of structural form for architectural
sorption, reflection, and transmission. Techni- and urban design projects. Strategies of
ques and data used to provide good hearing design for static and dynamic lateral loadings.
conditions, and to control noise in rooms, build- Quantitative analysis, using computational
ings, and the environment. Practical examples methods, and qualitative analysis, reading critiand case-histories. cal literature, of innovative or trend-setting
C. J. Rosenberg structures to better understand structural behavior, formal order, and tectonic character.
4.440 Basic Structural Theory Building Technology Staff
Prereq.: 8.02, 18.02 4.448, 4.449 Special Problems in Structural
U (Fall)
Design
3-3-6 REST
Prereq.: Permission of instructor Introduces the static behavior of structures
G (Fall, Spring)
and strength of materials. Reactions, truss
Units arranged H-LEVEL Grad Credit
analysis, stability of structures. Stress and
Can be repeated for credit
strain at a point, shear and bending moment
diagrams. Stresses in beams, Mohr's Circle, Supplementary structural design on individual
column buckling. Deflection of beams. or group basis. Registration subject to prior arLaboratory to solve structural problems by rangement for subject matter and supervision
building simple models and testing them. by staff.
Building Technology Staff Building Technology Staff
4.441 Introduction to Building Structural 4.451 Building Systems
Systems I
Prereq.: Permission of instructor
Prereq.: Permission of instructor Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
G (Spring) Acad Year 1997-98: G (Fall)
3-0-6 0-3-6
Introduction to the principles of structural be- Exposes the student to the nature and variety
havior, analysis, and design. Emphasis on in- of technological innovation in the building condividual structural elements and simple struction sector. Explores innovative apstrategies for load carrying. Topics include es- proaches to rationalized methods of
timating loads, introduction to statics, sectional construction, as applied to generic building
attributes, and basic discussions of stress and types. Views building systems as a total
strain; all set against background discussions process, including the integration of project orof design and the overall issues affecting each ganization, production, and erection. Includes
structural element. Structural types examined discussion of prefabrication and industrializainclude beams, trusses, simple frames, ar- tion. Students are required to conduct inches, and cables. dividual research on related topics, including
Building Technology Staff the presentation of relevant case studies.
E. Dluhosch
-
G (Fall)
3-0-9
Reviews building systems and technologies
with an emphasis on their impact on real estate decision making. Topics include building
location, foundation and structural systems,
enclosure, climate control, electrical and communications systems, plumbing, and fire and
disaster safety. Assignments include weekly or
bi-weekly analysis or case-study problems, as
well as a semester-long analysis and proposal
project focusing on an existing building asset.
Grading is based upon all written work and the
oral presentation of a final project.
Building Technology Staff
4.455 Integrated Building Systems
Prereq.: 4.405, 4.425, 4.441, 4.442
G (Fall)
3-2-7 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Capstone of the technology sequence in the
M.Arch. program. Emphasizes technologies related to structure, enclosure, climate, and light.
Consideration of theory and issues related to
manufacturing, construction and systems integration, and architectural design. Qualitative
and quantitative analysis of precedents via
computational tools, models, drawings, and
written reports. Identification of appropriate
technological systems for new designs on the
basis of system integration and support of architectural objectives.
P. J. Donnelly
4.461 Building Simulation
Prereq.: Permission of instructor
G (Spring)
3-0-9
Mathematical modeling of air flow in building interior as well as whole-building systems for purposes of: building energy analysis, airflow
analysis, and contaminant dispersal analysis;
measurement of thermal and flow characteristics of buildings; and control of mechanical
systems to affect thermal comfort, energy conservation, and indoor air quality. Uses computational fluid mechanics. Application to
practical and current research problems.
Building Technology Staff
4.471 Control of Space Conditioning
Systems
Prereq.: Permission of instructor
G (Fall, Spring)
3-0-9
Analysis of methods of conditioning buildings,
their control and energy consumption. Topics
include methods of heating, cooling, and ventilating buildings and associated control
strategies. Control analysis and design based
on root-locus plots, frequency response, and
state-space methods. Energy management
systems, including optimization and on-line
analysis.
L. K. Norford
Descriptions of Subjects 341
