School of Architecture and Planning
4.481 Building Technology Seminar 4.601 Introduction to Art History
(Revised Content)
Prereq.: Permission of instructor
G (Fall) Prereq.:
2-0-4 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Introduction to ongoing research activities in
building technology. Topics drawn from indoor
air quality and thermal comfort, building systems analysis and control, building energy
uses, and new building materials and construction techniques. Organized as a series of twoto three-week sessions that consider topics
through readings, discussions, design and
analysis projects, and student presentations.
L. K. Norford, L. R. Glicksman
4.488 Preparation for S.M.B.T. Thesis
4.489 Preparation for Building Technology
Ph.D. Thesis
Prereq.: Permission of instructor
G (Fall, Spring)
Units arranged [P/D/F] H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Selection of thesis topic, definition of method
of approach, and preparation of thesis
proposal. Independent study supplemented by
individual conference with faculty.
Building Technology Staff
4.491-4.493 Special Problems in Building
Technology
Prereq.: Permission of instructor
G (Fall, Spring)
Units arranged H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit
4.494 Special Problems in Building
Technology
Prereq.: Permission of instructor
U (Fall, Spring)
Units arranged [P/D/F]
Can be repeated for credit
4.497, 4.498 Special Problems in
Building Technology
Prereq.: Permission of instructor
G (Fall, Spring)
Units arranged [P/D/F] H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit
4.499 Special Problems in Building
Technology
Prereq.: Permission of instructor
G (Fall, IAP, Spring)
Units arranged [P/D/F] H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit
Supplementary work on individual or group
basis. Registration subject to prior arrangement for subject matter and supervision by
staff. 4.491-4.493 are letter-graded.
Building Technology Staff
-
U (Fall)
4-0-8 HASS-D, Category 3
Develops skills and knowledge essential to the
description, analysis, and interpretation of
visual artifacts through comparative analysis of
works of art drawn from many cultures and
time periods. Works in a wide range of media
from the Americas, Europe, Africa, and Asia
serve as case studies for investigation of the
processes by which art objects acquire meanings and value for particular audiences. Also
examines the questions art historians traditionally have asked about works of art and the
means they have developed to answer them.
M. Leja
4.602 Modern Art and Mass Culture
Prereq.: -
U (Spring)
4-0-8 HASS-D, Category 3
Discusses the history of painting and design
from the mid-nineteenth century through the
1980s in relation to emerging visual technologies (lithography, photography, the poster,
photomontage), urban audiences, and consumer culture. Major artistic movements (Impressionism, Cubism, Russian Constructivism,
Pop Art) are examined in relation to critical and
theoretical writings about the relationship between the traditional arts and mass culture. No
previous knowledge of art history is required.
L. W. Kinney
4.605 Introduction to the History and
Theory of Architecture
Prereq.- -
4.609 Seminar in the History of Art and
Architecture
Prereq.: Four subjects in the 4.6xx series
Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: U (Fall or Spring)
3-0-9
Examination of historical method in art and/or
architecture focusing on periods and problems
determined by the research interest of the
faculty member leading the seminar. Emphasis on critical reading and viewing and
direct tutorial guidance. Extensive discussion.
D. H. Friedman, L. W. Kinney
4.613 Civic and Residential Islamic
Architecture
Prereq.:
U (Spring)
4-0-8 HASS-D, Category 3
Provides an outline of the history of architecture and urbanism from Ancient Egypt to the
present. Analyzes buildings as the products of
culture and in relation to the special problems
of architectural design.
D. H. Friedman
4.607 Thinking About Architecture: In
History and At Present
Prereq.: Permission of instructor
G (Spring)
3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Subject on the problem of a history of architecture in terms not only of the formal end
products, but also in relation to the structure of
ideas and the cultures that have guided the formal productions. Addresses the present condition in architecture as much as the past and
covers case studies from Vitruvius to the twentieth century.
HTC Staff
-
Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: U (Spring)
3-0-6 HASS
Studies select examples of palatial, residential,
commercial, and landscape architecture in the
Islamic world in chronological order. Examines
the formation and developments of architectural traditions, their possible models, their survival, their regional transformations, and the
various influences at different historical junctions, all within the framework of the general Islamic culture.
N. Rabbat
4.614 Religious Architecture and Islamic
Culture
Prereq.: -
U (Fall)
3-0-9 HASS-D, Category 3
Reviews the history of religious architecture in
the Islamic World, and discusses its development in light of a changing Islam from a reform
movement in seventh-century Arabia to a
global power straddling three continents in the
medieval period to the common religion of a
number of competing empires in the premodern and smaller states in the modern
periods. Presents Islamic architecture both as
a full-fledged historical tradition and as a
dynamic and interactive cultural catalyst that influenced and was influenced by the several
civilizations with which it came into contact.
This diversity of exchanges produced the
various architectural manifestations that dot
the historical and geographic map of the Islamic World.
N. Rabbat
4.615 The Architecture of Cairo
Prereq.: -
Acad Year 1996-97: U (Spring)
Acad Year 1997-98: Not offered
3-0-6 HASS
A thorough examination of the urban and architectural history of Cairo from the initial settlements on the site (640s) to the twentieth
century. Investigates the development of
Cairene architecture both in its Islamic and
Mediterranean contexts and in light of the cultural, political, and social history of the city and
the country. Focuses on the medieval period
(eleventh to fifteenth century) when Cairo was
the largest Mediterranean metropolis and a cultural and intellectual center of the Islamic world.
N. Rabbat
342 Chapter Vill
