Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science Course 6
6.868J The Society of Mind 6.876J Advanced Topics in
Cryptography
(Same subject as MAS.731J)
Prereq.: Must have read The Society of Mind, (Same subject as 18.426J)
permission of instructor Prereq.: 6.875J
G (Spring) Acad Year 1996-97: G (Spring)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit Acad Year 1997-98: Not offered
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Introduction to a theory that tries to explain
Can be repeated for credit
how minds are made from collections of
simpler processes. Treats such aspects of Recent results in cryptography and faultthinking as vision, language, learning, reason- tolerant distributed computing presented and
ing, memory, consciousness, ideals, emotions, discussed. Lectures by instructor, invited
and personality. Incorporates ideas from speakers, and students. Alternate years.
psychology, artificial intelligence, and com- S. Goldwasser
puter science to resolve theoretical issues
such as wholes vs parts, structural vs function- 6.891-6.899 Special Topics in the Computer
al descriptions, declarative vs procedural repre- Sciences
sentations, symbolic vs connectionist models,
and logical vs common-sense theories of learn- Prereq.: Permission of instructor
ing. G (Fall, Spring)
M. Minsky Units arranged H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit
6.871 Knowledge-Based Applications A seminar-type discussion of special topics in
Systems the computer sciences. Opportunity for
graduate students and instructors to invesPrereq.: 6.034; 6.036 or 6.824
tigate a topic of common interest. Topic and
G (Spring)
staff announced each term. These subjects
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
given independently or sequentially, as cirDevelopment of programs containing a sig- cumstances require.
nificant amount of knowledge about their ap- J. V. Guttag
plication domain. Outline: 1) brief review of
relevant Al techniques; 2) case studies from a
number of application domains, chosen to illustrate principles of system development; 3)
discussion of technical issues encountered in Special Subjects
building a system, including selection of
knowledge representation, knowledge acquisition, etc.; and 4) discussion of current and fu- 6.901 Inventions and Patents
ture research. Hands-on experience in building
Prereq.: 14.02
an expert system (term project). 8 Engineering
Design Points. U (Fall)
R. Davis, P. Szolovits, H. E. Shrobe 3-0-6
Engineering School-Wide Elective Subject.
6.872 Medical Computing Description given at end of this chapter in
(New) SWE section on page 999.
R. H. Rines Prereq.: 6.034
G (Spring)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit 6.910 Special Studies in Electrical
Engineering and Computer Science
Analyzes computational needs of clinical
medicine, reviews systems and approaches Prereq.:
that have been used to support those needs,
and examines new technologies. Topics: the
nature of clinical data; architecture and design
of healthcare information systems; privacy and
security issues; medical expert systems; computing support for medical education. Case
studies of contemporary systems. Term project
using a large pseudonymized clinical dataset
integrates classroom topics. 6 Engineering
Design Points.
P. Szolovits
6.875J Cryptography and Cryptanalysis
(Same subject as 18.425J)
Prereq.: 6.046J or 6.851 or 18.421
G (Fall)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
A rigorous introduction to modern cryptography. Emphasis on the fundamental cryptographic primitives of public-key encryption,
digital signatures, and pseudo-random number
generation, and their computational complexity
requirements.
S. Goldwasser
-
6.911-6.914 Special Advanced
Undergraduate Subjects in Electrical
Engineering and Computer Science
Prereq.:
U (Fall, Spring, Summer)
Units arranged
Can be repeated for credit
Opportunity for individual study at the undergraduate level related to electrical engineering
and computer science not covered by other
subjects offered by the Department. Student is
responsible for initiation of arrangements and
filing of proposal. Consult Department Undergraduate Office.
A. C. Smith
-
U (Fall, IAP, Spring)
Units arranged [P/D/F
Can be repeated for credit
6.915-6.919 Special Advanced
Undergraduate Subjects in Electrical
Engineering and Computer Science
Prereq.: -
U (Fall, IAP, Spring)
Units arranged
Can be repeated for credit
Advanced undergraduate subjects not offered
in the regular curriculum. Consult Department
to learn of offerings for a particular term.
Registration by permission of instructor.
A. C. Smith
6.921 VI-A Internship
Prereq.: -
U (Summer)
0-12-0 [P/D/F]
Can be repeated for credit
Provides academic credit for the first two Assignments of VI-A students at companies affiliated with the Department's VI-A Internship
Program. Students register for this subject
twice. The grade of "J" is given following completion of the first Assignment. Students must
complete the second Assignment in order to
receive the full academic credit of 24 units for
this subject. Enrollment limited to students participating in the VI-A Internship Program.
M. Zahn
6.922 Advanced VI-A Internship
Prereq.: 6.921
U (Spring, Summer)
0-12-0 [P/D/F]
Provides academic credit for the third Assignment of VI-A students at companies affiliated
with the Department's VI-A Internship Program. Enrollment limited to students participating in the VI-A Internship Program.
M. Zahn
6.929 Undergraduate Project Presentation
Prereq.: -
U (Fall, Spring, Summer)
0-3-0
Can be repeated for credit
Registration for written presentation of the advanced undergraduate project, when the
project work is carried out as part of a VI-A Assignment. Consult Department Undergraduate
Office.
A. C. Smith
6.930 Management in Engineering
Prereq.: -
U (Fall)
3-0-9
Engineering School-Wide Elective Subject.
Description given at end of this chapter in
SWE section on page 562.
J.-H. Chun, H. S. Marcus
Descriptions of Subjects 363
