School of Architecture and Planning
4.641 19th-Century Art
Prereq.: -
Acad Year 1996-97: U (Fall)
Acad Year 1997-98: Not offered
4-0-8 HASS
Survey of major artists and movements in
nineteenth-century French painting, from NeoClassicism to Post-Impressionism. Emphasis
on emerging phenomena and concepts characteristic of the century, including: new visual
technologies (lithography, photography,
posters), the avant garde, the dealer/critic system, the museum and exhibition space, and
the engagement of art with issues of class,
gender, and politics.
L. W. Kinney
4.642 Advanced Study in Modern Art
Prereq.: Permission of instructor
G (Spring)
Units arranged H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit
Seminar on a selected topic from modern art,
stressing theoretical or critical issues of contemporary concern. Requires original research
and presentation of oral and written reports.
L. W. Kinney
4.643J Modern Art and Sexuality
(Subject meets with SP.476, SP.477J)
Prereq.: Permission of instructor
Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: G (Fall)
Units arranged H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit
Explores the impact of recent critical thinking
about representation, gender, and sexual difference on traditional understandings of modernism and methods of interpretation in the
visual arts. Artists, issues, and types of imagery vary from year to year, but always include consideration of nineteenth-century
painters of the nude (Courbet, Manet, Degas),
theories of the construction of sexuality, and
an introduction to feminist film theory. Open to
qualified undergraduates.
L. W. Kinney
4.645 Selected Topics in Architecture -
4.647 Advanced Study in the Theory and
History of Historic Preservation
Prereq.: Permission of instructor
Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: G (Fall)
Units arranged H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Seminar on the development and critical issues of historic preservation. Analyzes the
questions of monument and memory, historic
preservation in the urban context, the polemics
in modern preservation theory, and the design
of new buildings in historic settings. Requires
research, oral presentations, and written study.
HTC Staff
4.651 20th-Century Art
Prereq.:
1750 to the Present
Prereq.: 4.605
G (Spring)
3-0-6
General study of modern architecture in
Europe and America in the context of architectural and social programs. Focuses on important problems and architectural proposals of a
certain period to be analyzed using a variety of
examples. Instead of supporting the idea of a
linear development, it explores alternative
"clusters" of architectural history. Required of
all first-year M.Arch. Students. Midterm and
final exams.
HTC Staff
-
4.661 Theory and Method in the Study of
Architecture and Art
Prereq.: Permission of instructor
G (Fall)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit
Studies theoretical and historiographical works
pertaining to the fields of architecture, art, and
environmental studies. Members of seminar
pursue work designed to examine their own
presuppositions and methods. Open only to
Ph.D. candidates and other advanced students.
HTC Staff
4.662 Advanced Study in the History of
Urban Form
Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered Prereq.: Permission of instructor
Acad Year 1997-98: U (Fall) G (Fall, Spring)
4-0-5 HASS Units arranged H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit
The history of twentieth-century modernism
and its internal contradictions, from Cubism Seminar on a selected topic in the history of
and Futurism to the present. Considers espe- urban form. Requires original research and
cially the formation of anti-artistic attitudes in presentation of oral and written reports.
Dada and Surrealism, the constructivist and D. H. Friedman
productivist project of integrating art and
society and the contemporary post-modern 4.663 History of Urban Form
critiques of the avant-garde.
HTC Staff Prereq.: Permission of instructor
Acad Year 1996-97: G (Fall)
Acad Year 1997-98: Not offered
4.653 Advanced Study in 20th-Century
Units arranged H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Art
Studies in the history of the physical city from Prereq.: Permission of instructor
Antiquity to the present, with points of special
G (Fall)
Units arranged H-LEVEL Grad Credit focus determined by the instructor. Analyzes
the typologies of urban buildings, public
Can be repeated for credit
places, and city plans in their relation to changSeminar on a selected topic from twentieth- ing contexts of culture, politics, and the struccentury art. Requires original research and ture of public and private institutions.
presentation of oral and written reports. D. H. Friedman
HTC Staff
4.665 Contemporary Architecture and
4.654-4.659 Advanced Study in Modern Critical Debate
Architecture
Prereq.: 4.123 or 4.125
Prereq.: Permission of instructor G (Fall)
G (Fall, Spring) 3-0-6
Units arranged H-LEVEL Grad Credit Critical review of works, theories, and polemics
Can be repeated for credit
of the last twenty-five years. Aim is a historical
Seminar or lecture on a selected topic in the ar- understanding of the period and the developchitecture of the late eighteenth century to the ment of a meaningful framework to assess the
present, in Europe and America. Requires present situation in architecture. Intended for
original research and presentation of oral and M.Arch. students.
written reports. E. Dunham-Jones
S. Anderson, Staff
4.666-4.669 Special Studies in the History,
4.660 The Architectural Agenda Theory, and Criticism of Architecture and
Urban Form
Prereq.: Permission of instructor
G (Spring) Prereq.: Permission of instructor
Units arranged H-LEVEL Grad Credit G (Fall, Spring)
Units arranged H-LEVEL Grad Credit Seminar on the history and the theory of arCan be repeated for credit chitecture seen as an epistemological question
within the wider context of knowledge. Discus- Special topics in the history, theory, and
sion seminar that especially addresses criticism of architecture and urban form, varyproblems in architectural research. ing at the discretion of the instructor.
HTC Staff HTC Staff
344 Chapter Vill
