School of Architecture and Planning
4.256J Housing and Urban Policy
(Same subject as 11.420J)
Prereq.: 11.200 or 4.144
G (Spring)
3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
See description under subject 11.420J.
Consult Department Headquarters.
4.257J Property Rights Under Transition
(Same subject as 11.467J, 17.550J)
Prereq.: 11.210 or permission of instructor
G (Fall)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
See description under subject 11.467J.
K. R. Polenske
4.259 Special Problems in Environmental
Design
Prereq.: Permission of instructor
G (Fall, Spring)
Units arranged H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit
Supplementary work on individual or group
basis. Registration subject to prior arrangement for subject matter and supervision by
staff.
J. Beinart, M. Dennis
4.264 Environmental Psychology
Prereq.: -
U (Spring)
3-3-6 HASS
Presents social science theories and methods
that apply to human transactions with a wide
range of environments. Focuses on development of applied research skills relevant to successful designing for human use, from urban
to machine interface. Readings reinforce lectures and fieldwork. Semester projects dovetail
with student's field of interest.
S. C. Howell
4.265 Behavior in the Built Environment
Prereq.: -
4.266J User Needs Programming
(Same subject as 11.329J)
Prereq.: Permission of instructor
Acad Year 1996-97: G (Spring)
Acad Year 1997-98: Not offered
3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
A combination seminar and practicum in
design programming. Combines readings and
discussions on how to collect, select, and organize user information tor use in the planning
and design process. Students are placed with
architecture firms, public or private community
agencies that have active projects requiring assistance to inform their plans and designs.
S. C. Howell
4.269 Special Problems in Social Science
and Architecture
Prereq.: Permission of instructor
Acad Year 1996-97: G (Fall, Spring)
Acad Year 1997-98: Not offered
Units arranged H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit
Supplementary work on individual or group
basis. Registration subject to prior arrangement for subject matter and supervision by
staff.
S. C. Howell
4.273 Introduction to Design Inquiry
(Revised Units)
Prereq.:
G (Fall, Spring)
3-3-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Introduces behavioral science theories and
methods as they relate to interactive affects of
people in residential, working, and therapeutic
settings. Readings supplement lectures and
assigned fieldwork. Application of research
methods such as behavior mapping, interviewing, and perceptual measures in systematic
evaluations of environments in use and to
design programming.
S. C. Howell
-
4.278, 4.279 Special Problems in Theory in
Architecture
Prereq.: Permission of instructor
G (Fall, Spring)
Units arranged H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit
Supplementary work on individual or group
basis. Registration subject to prior arrangement for subject matter and supervision by
staff.
W. L. Porter
4.280 Architecture Internship
Prereq.: 4.125 or 4.126
U (lAP)
Units arranged [PID/F]
Can be repeated for credit
Work in an architect's office to gain experience, improve skills, and see the inner
workings of an everyday architectural practice.
Internships in all sizes of firms and in public
and nonprofit agencies. Internships require fulltime work for the entire IAP. Nonpaying.
A. Pendleton-Jullian
4.285, 4.286 Research Topics in
Architecture Studies
Prereq.: Permission of instructor
G (Fall, Spring)
Units arranged H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit
Research work on individual or group basis.
G (Fall) Registration subject to prior arrangement for
3-0-9
subject matter and supervision by staff.
Explores, through exercises, lectures, and dis- Staff
cussion, the nature and exercise of architectural intelligence; investigates design as 4.288 Preparation for S.M.Arch.S. Thesis
processes located in individuals and in groups;
seeks to understand design as argument, as Prereq.: Permission of instructor
claims for which reasons can be adduced, as G (Fall, Spring)
logic in which there are explicit sets of ele- Units arranged [P/D/F] H-LEVEL Grad Credit
ments and relations among them, and as ex- 4.289 Preparation for Architecture
periment in which design and its results are Studies - Ph.D. Thesis
themselves used to inform future designs or
simply to inquire. Subject aims to open Prereq.: Permission of instructor
avenues for further research. G (Fall, Spring)
W. L. Porter Units arranged [P/D/F] H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Selection of thesis topic, definition of method
4.276 Design Research Seminar of approach, and preparation of thesis
proposal. Independent study supplemented by Prereq.: Permission of instructor
individual conference with faculty. G (Spring)
Architecture Studies Staff
2-0-7 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
What guarantees does the designer have that
what is intended will be perceived? how can
one come to make reliable judgments about
the quality of designs? What constitutes good
design? Considers design in several ways: as
experience, as communication, as language,
as problem framing and solving, as logic. Each
of these has implications for how one thinks
about and evaluates design quality and for
how one designs an experiment to learn more
about design and designing. Students' term
project is to design such an experiment.
W. L. Porter
338 Chapter Vill
