School of Science
Course 9 Brain and Cognitive
Sciences
For degree requirements, see listing in
Chapter VII under the School of Science.
9.UR Undergraduate Research
Prereq.: -
U (Fall, Spring, Summer)
Units arranged [P/D/F]
Can be repeated for credit
9.URG Undergraduate Research
Prereq.: - U (Fall, lAP, Spring, Summer)
Units arranged
Can be repeated for credit
Individual participation in an ongoing research
project.
Consult A. Hein.
9.00 Introduction to Psychology
(Revised Content)
Prereq.: -
9.011J Principles of Neuroscience 9.029 Cellular Physiology
(Same subject as 7.65J) Prereq.: Permission of instructor
Prereq.: Permission of instructor Acad Year 1996-97: G (Spring)
G (Fall) Acad Year 1997-98: Not offered
6-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit 3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Survey of principles underlying the structure Focuses on combined biochemical, molecular,
and function of the nervous system, integrating and biophysical approaches to investigate the
molecular, cellular, systems, and computation- physiology of excitable membranes. Emphasis al approaches. Topics: development, cell biol- is on structure, function, and regulation of
ogy of neurons, neurotransmitters and membrane ion channels. Alternate years.
synaptic transmission, sensory systems of the Staff
brain, the neuroendocrine system, the motor
system, higher cortical functions, behavioral 9.03 Neural Basis of Learning and Memory
and cellular analyses of learning and memory.
M. Sur, A. Graybiel, E. Bizzi, S. Corkin, (Subject meets with 9.031)
P. Schiller, R. J. Wurtman, W. Quinn, Prereq.: 9.01
M. Wilson, E. Miller, E. Adelson, H. Steller Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: U (Fall)
3-0-9
9.02 Brain and Behavior Laboratory
U (Fall)
(New) 9.031 Neural Basis of Learning and Memory
4-0-8 HASS-D, Category 4
Prereq.: 9.01 (Subject meets with 9.03)
A first course in psychology: how we think, U (Spring) Prereq.:
see, feel, learn, talk, act, grow, fear, love, hate,
1-5-6 Institute LAB
lust, and find meaning. The great controversies: nature and nurture, free will, conscious- Consists of a series of "hands-on" laboratories
ness, human differences, self and society. designed to give students experience with
Largely laboratory and field studies of be- common techniques for conducting neuroshavior, with relevant ideas from evolutionary cience research. Included are sessions on
biology, genetics, brain science, philosophy, anatomical, ablation, neurophysiological, and
economics, sociology, and the arts. Enrollment computer modeling techniques, and ways
may be limited. these techniques are used to study brain funcS. Pinker tion. Each session consists of a brief quiz on
assigned readings that provide background to
the lab, a lecture that expands on the read- 9.01 Neuroscience and Behavior
ings, and that week's laboratory. Weekly lab
Prereq.: 9.62 or 9.00 reports required.
U (Fall) E. Miller
3-0-9 REST
Relation of structure and function at various 9.021 Dynamic Neural Processing in the
levels of neuronal integration. Topics include: Vertebrate Forebrain
functional neuroanatomy and neurophysiology, Prereq.: 9.011J
sensory and motor systems, centrally
Acad Year 1996-97: G (Fall)
programmed behavior, sensory systems, sleep
Acad Year 1997-98: Not offered
and dreaming, motivation and reward, emotion-
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
al displays of various types, "higher functions"
and the neocortex, and neural processes in There is increasing evidence that neural
learning and memory. processing is dynamic and subject to plastic
G. E. Schneider changes over time. Subject considers topics related to neuroplasticity in the forebrain. Brain
systems discussed include the cortex and
thalamus, the basal ganglia, and elements of
the limbic system. Short- and long-term changes in neuronal processing are considered. Alternate years.
A. M. Graybiel
-
Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: G (Fall)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Topics in mammalian learning and memory including cellular mechanisms. Neural plasticity,
electrophysiology, behavior, and computational approaches considered. Emphasis on
animal models of hippocampal mechanisms
and function. Lectures and discussion of
papers. An additional project is required for
graduate credit.
M. Wilson, P. Dayan
9.036 The Visual System
Prereq.: Permission of instructor
Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: G (Spring)
3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Reviews the current neurophysiological and
neuroanatomical research literature on the
mammalian visual system. Alternate years.
P. H. Schiller
380 Chapter Vill
