Department of Biology Course 7
7.75J Topics in Metabolic Biochemistry 7.81 Frontiers in Modern Plant Biology
(Same subject as 5.77J) Prereq.: 7.03, 7.05
Prereq.: 7.05 or 5.07 Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
G (Fall) Acad Year 1997-98: G (Fall)
4-0-8 H-LEVEL Grad Credit 2-0-7 [P/D/F] H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Special topics include major metabolic path- Intensive analysis of key original literature,
ways for the biosynthesis of certain cellular both classical and current, with emphasis on
constituents and oxidative metabolism. Em- experimental approaches and analysis of
phasis is on enzymology and methods used to primary data. Topics include regulation of cell,
understand metabolism and enzymatic proces- tissue, and organ growth; control of gene exses. pression; fertility, embryogenesis, and seed
G. M. Brown, J. Liu development; transformation and transgenic
plants; transposable elements and genetic
7.76 Topics in Protein Biochemistry structure; function and genetics of organelles;
pathogenesis and disease resistance. Student
Prereq.: Permission of instructor reports and class presentations.
Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered E. R. Signer, G. R. Fink
Acad Year 1997-98: G (Fall)
2-0-7 7.82 Selected Topics of Mammalian
In-depth analysis and discussion of classic and Development and Genetics
current literature with emphasis on the relationPrereq.:
ship between protein structure and function.
Topics include binding specificity; cooperativity
and allostery; protein folding, evolution and
macromolecular assembly- sequence homology and prediction of structure; and protein engineering and design. Undergraduates should
have taken 7.71 or 5.64.
P. Kim, R. Sauer
7.77 Workshop on Nucleic Acids and Their
Interactions with Proteins
(Revised Units)
Prereq.: 7.05 or 7.51
G (Spring)
3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Interactive discussions, lectures, and student
presentations, including in-class problem solving. Chemistry, structure, and function of DNA
and RNA. Biochemical, physical, and genetic
approaches to understanding nucleic acids.
Forces stabilizing nucleic acid structures.
Structural motifs in RNA molecules including
pseudoknots and tetraloops. Transfer RNAs.
Prediction of structures of large RNAs. Superhelical and bent DNA and thermodynamic
analysis of special DNA conformations. Selection system for generating novel RNA and
DNA structures for ligand interactions.
Analysis of protein-nucleic acid interactions
with examples including repressors and activators, nucleosomes, restriction enzymes,
aminoacyl tRNA synthetases, and RNA binding proteins. Analysis of methods of transcription. RNA and protein evolution in relation to
the development of peptide synthesis and the
genetic code.
P. Schimmel
-
G (Fall)
2-0-4 [P/D/F]
Seminar covering biological, genetic, and
molecular approaches to mouse development.
Topics include preimplantation development;
postimplantation development; cell lineage
studies; embryonic stem cells and gene targeting; transgenic technology; genomic imprinting; tissue interactions and induction;
X-inactivation; sex determination; genetic
basis of coat color; muscle development.
R. Jaenisch, D. Page
7.84 Topics in Bacteriology
Prereq.: 7.21, permission of instructor
G (Fall)
2-0-6 [P/D/F] H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Recent developments in bacteriology:
regulatory mechanisms and membrane
phenomena.
Consult Biology Student Office.
7.85 Topics in Cell Biology
Prereq.: Permission of instructor
G (Spring)
3-0-9
Seminar on aspects of cell cycle regulation -
7.88J The Protein Folding Problem
(Same subject as 5.48J, 10.543)
Prereq.: 5.07 or 7.05 or equivalent
G (Spring)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Seminar analyzing the mechanisms by which
the amino acid sequence of polypeptide
chains determines their three-dimensional conformation. Topics include: sequence determinants of secondary structure; folding of
newly synthesized polypeptide chains within
cells; unfolding and refolding of proteins in
vitro; folding intermediates aggregation and
competing off-pathway reactions; role of
chaperonins, isomerases, and other helper
proteins; protein recovery problems in the
biotechnology industry; diseases associated
with protein folding defects.
J. A. King
7.89J Seminar on Pharmaceutical and
Biotechnology Industry Management
(Same subject as 15.138J, 10.940J)
Prereq.: Permission of instructor
G (Fall)
3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit
See description under subject 15.138J.
T. J. Allen, C. L. Cooney, S. N. Finkelstein,
A. Sinskey
7.91 Topics in Genomics
(New)
Prereq.: Permission of instructor
G (Fall)
2-0-4 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Seminars and readings in genomics. Topics
covered include infomatics, genetic and
molecular biology strategies and techniques,
and hardware systems design.
E. Lander, P. Matsudaira, Staff
7.92J Neurology, Neuropsychology, and
Neurobiology of Aging
(New)
(Same subject as 9.110J)
Prereq.: Permission of instructor
G (Spring)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit mechanisms and control of DNA replication,
chromosome structure, and chromosome Lectures and discussion explore the clinical,
segregation - using classic and current litera- behavioral, and molecular aspects of brain
ture and emphasizing multiple approaches. aging processes in humans. Topics include:
S. Bell, P. Sorger loss of sensory and motor function and loss of
memory and other cognitive abilitites in normal
7.87 X-Ray Crystallography of Proteins and aging; neurodegenerative conditions, such as
Nucleic Acids Parkinson's, Alzheimer's, and Huntington's diseases, and Down's syndrome. Based on lecPrereq.: 7.71 or permission of instructor tures, readings taken from the primary
Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered literature, and discussions. Students are exAcad Year 1997-98: G (Spring) pected to present topics based on their read-
2-0-7 H-LEVEL Grad Credit ings. One written mid-term test and one final
Overview of the major theoretical and practical paper.
problems involved in x-ray crystallographic S. Corkin, V. Ingram
studies of macromolecules. Topics include discussion of basic diffraction theory, crystallization and space group determination, data
collection, heavy atom derivative methods,
anomalous scattering, molecular replacement,
model-building and refinement.
Staff
Descriptions of Subjects 369
