Physics
For degree requirements, see listing in
Chapter VII under the School of Science.
General Undergraduate
Subjects
8.UR Undergraduate Research
Prereq.: -
U (Fall, Spring, Summer)
Units arranged [P/D/F]
Can be repeated for credit
Undergraduate research opportunities in
physics. For further information, contact the
Departmental UROP Coordinator.
D. E. Pritchard
8.01 Physics I
Prereq.: -
U (Fall, Spring)
5-0-7 PHYSICS I
Credit cannot also be received for 8.012 or
8.01 X
Introduces classical mechanics. Space and
time: straight-line kinematics; motion in a
plane; forces and equilibrium; experimental
basis of Newton's laws; particle dynamics;
universal gravitation; collisions and conservation laws; work and potential energy; vibrational motion; conservative forces; inertial forces
and non-inertial frames; central force motions;
rigid bodies and rotational dynamics.
Fall Term: W. Busza and Staff
Spring Term: B. Wyslouch
8.012 Physics I
Prereq.: -
8.01X Physics I
Prereq.:
U (Fall)
5-0-7 PHYSICS I
Credit cannot also be received for 8.01 or
8.01X
Elementary mechanics, presented at greater
depth than in 8.01. Newton's laws, concepts of
momentum, energy, angular momentum, rigid body motion, non-inertial systems. Uses
elementary calculus freely. Concurrent registration in a math subject more advanced than
18.01 is recommended. In addition to the
theoretical subject matter, several experiments
in classical mechanics are performed by the
students in the laboratory.
W. Ketterle
-
U (Fall)
5-0-7 PHYSICS I
Credit cannot also be received for 8.01 or
8.012
An introduction to basic topics in physics, supported by take-home experiments. The sequence of topics includes space and time;
force, work, and mechanical energy; heat and
mechanical/thermal energy conversions;
electrical and chemical energy; atomicity and
kinetic theory of gases; introduction to wave
motion; Newtonian mechanics and gravitation;
simple harmonic motion in mechanical systems. Kits of equipment are provided for the
performance of a relevant take-home experiment as part of the homework each week.
Many of the experiments involve simple electrical and electronic instrumentation.
P. Dourmashkin, H. V. Bradt
8.01 L Physics I
Prereq.: -
Department of Physics Course 8
Course 8
8.02 Physics I
Prereq.: 8.01 or 8.01X or 8.01L or 8.012; 18.01
U (Fall, Spring)
5-0-7 PHYSICS 11
Credit cannot also be received for 8.022
Introduction to electromagnetism and electrostatics: electric charge, Coulomb's law, electric
structure of matter; conductors and dielectrics.
Concepts of electrostatic field and potential,
electrostatic energy. Electric currents, magnetic fields and Ampere's law. Magnetic
materials. Time-varying fields and Faraday's
law of induction. Basic electric circuits.
Electromagnetic waves and Maxwell's equations. Credit cannot also be received for 8.02X.
Fall Term: D. Kleppner
Spring Term: J. L. Tonry
8.022 Physics 11
Prereq.: 8.012, 18.02
U (Fall, Spring)
5-0-7 PHYSICS 11
Credit cannot also be received for 8.02
Parallel to 8.02, but more advanced mathe- U (Fall)
matically. Some knowledge of vector calculus 3-0-9 PHYSICS I
assumed. Maxwell's equations, in both difIntroduction to classical mechanics (see ferential and integral form. Electrostatic and
description under 8.01). Material is covered magnetic vector potential. Properties of
over a Longer interval, so that the subject is dielectrics and magnetic materials. In addition
completed by the end of the Independent Ac- to the theoretical subject matter, several experitivities Period. During the first month of clas- ments in electricity and magnetism are perses, substantial emphasis is given to reviewing formed by the students in the laboratory.
and strengthening pre-calculus mathematics, Credit cannot also be received for 8.02X.
basic physics concepts, and problem-solving Fall Term: R. Ashoori
skills. Delay in the use of calculus permits stu- Spring Term: P. Fisher
dents more exposure to 18.01 before the
material is used in the physics. Overall con- 8.02X Physics 11
tent, depth, and difficulty is otherwise identical
to that of 8.01. Enrollment is limited to 100 Prereq.: 8.01, 8.01 X, or 8.012
freshmen. Students receive credit for 8.01 on U (Spring)
their transcripts. Credit cannot also be 5-0-7 PHYSICS 11
received for 8.012 or 8.01 X. Designed as a sequel to 8.01X, which is the G. Stephans recommended but not required prerequisite.
Main emphasis on electricity and magnetism.
Topics include currents and DC circuits;
capacitance, resistance, and nonsteady currents; Coulomb's Law and electrostatic fields;
Gauss's Law; electric potential; magnetic fields
of currents; electromagnetic induction; magnetism and matter; AC circuits and resonance;
Maxwell's equations; electromagnetic fields in
space; electromagnetism and relativity;
electromagnetic radiation as waves and
photons. Kits of equipment are provided for
the performance of a relevant take-home experiment as part of the homework each week.
Credit cannot also be received for 8.02 or
8.022.
J. L. Matthews
Descriptions of Subjects 371
