Department of Chemical Engineering Course 10
10.981 Seminar in Colloid and 10.985 Seminar in Combustion Chemistry 10.989 Special Topics in Biotechnology
Interface Science
Prereq.: Permission of instructor Prereq.: Permission of instructor
Prereq.: Permission of instructor G (Fall, Spring) G (Fall, Spring)
G (Fall, Spring) 2-0-4 [P/D/F] 2-0-4 [P/D/F]
2-0-4 [P/D/F] Can be repeated for credit Can be repeated for credit
Can be repeated for credit Readings, presentations, and discussions of Research seminars, presented by graduate
Review of current topics in colloid and inter- selected, currently active research topics in students and visitors from industry and
face science. Topics include statistical combustion chemistry. Examples include academia, covering a broad range of topics of
mechanics and thermodynamics of micellar chemistry and structure of flames, ther- current interest in biotechnology. Discussion
solutions, self-assembling systems, and mochemical kinetics methods and calculations, focuses on generic questions with potential
microemulsions; solubilization of simple ions, mathematical modeling and computer analysis biotechnological applications and the quest for
amino acids, and proteins in reversed micelles; of reaction networks, experimental methods, in- solutions through a coordinated interdisciplienzymatic reactions in reversed micelles; teractions of chemistry with transport and fluid nary approach.
phase equilibria in colloidal systems; interfacial mechanics. Gr. Stephanopoulos
phenomena in colloidal systems; biomedical J. B. Howard
aspects of colloidal systems. 10.990 Introduction to Chemical
D. Blankschtein, T. A. Hatton, P. E. Laibinis 10.986 Gas-Solid Reactions Engineering Research
Prereq.: Permission of instructor Prereq.:
10.982 Special Topics in Experimental
G (Fall, Spring)
Colloid and Surface Science
2-0-4 [P/D/F]
(Revised Content)
Can be repeated for credit
Prereq.: Permission of instructor
Review of current literature and research on
G (Fall, Spring)
gas-solid reactions, with particular emphasis
2-0-4 [PlO/F]
on combustion, gasification, and gas absorpCan be repeated for credit
tion at high temperatures. Includes the
In-depth discussion of fundamental physical mechanisms and kinetics of gas-solid reacrelationships underlying techniques commonly tions, the characterization of the structure and
used in the study of colloids and surfaces with modeling of diffusion in porous solids, aerosol
a focus on recent advances and experimental formation, and growth.
applications. Topics have included the applica- M. Flytzani-Stephanopoulos, A. F. Sarofim
tion of steady-state and time-resolved fluorescence spectroscopies, infrared spectroscopy, 10.987 Solid Thin Films and Interfaces
and scanning probe microscopies.
T. A. Hatton, P. E. Laibinis Prereq.: Permission of instructor
G (Fall, Spring)
2-0-4 [PIDIF]
10.983 Reactive Processing of Materials Can be repeated for credit
Prereq.: Permission of instructor
Current research topics and fundamental isG (Fall, Spring)
2-0-4 [PIDIF] sues relating the structure and properties of
solid thin films and interfaces to processing hisCan be repeated for credit
tory. Emphasis on applying analytical techniAdvanced topics in synthesis of materials ques, such as solid-state NMR, to explore the
through processes involving transport thermodynamics and kinetics of growth, defect
phenomena and chemical reactions. Chemical formation, and structural modification incurred
vapor deposition, plasma processing, and during microelectronics fabrication.
chemical vapor infiltration, modeling and ex- K. K. Gleason
perimental approaches to kinetics of gas
phase and surface reactions, transport 10.988 Synthesis and Surface Chemistry of
phenomena in complex systems, materials syn- Materials
thesis, and materials characterization. Seminars by graduate students, postdoctoral Prereq.: Permission of instructor
associates, participating faculty, and visiting G (Fall, Spring)
lecturers. 2-0-4 [P/D/F]
K. F. Jensen Can be repeated for credit
Lectures, readings, and discussions of novel
10.984 Biomedical Applications of synthesis of advanced ceramic, catalytic,
Chemical Engineering electronic, and optical materials by physical
and chemical routes. Examines surface-strucPrereq.: Permission of instructor
ture-property relationships of ultrafine
G (Fall, Spring)
materials. Utilizes process variables and spe-
2-0-4 [P/D/F]
cialized surface characterization techniques to
Can be repeated for credit
approach structure tailoring of materials. Open
Weekly seminar with lectures on current re- to undergraduate students and UROP stusearch by graduate students, postdoctoral fel- dents interested in these selected research
lows, and visiting scientists on topics related to topics.
biomedical applications of chemical engineer- J. Y. Ying
ing. Specific topics include polymeric controlled release technology, extracorporal reactor
design, biomedical polymers, bioengineering
aspects of pharmaceuticals, and
biomaterials/tissue and cell interactions.
R. S. Langer, L. G. Cima
-
G (Fall)
3-0-3 [P/Of F]
Can be repeated for credit
Introduction to research in chemical engineering by faculty of chemical engineering department. Focus is on recent developments and
research projects available to new graduate
students.
P. A. Brown
10.991 Seminar in Chemical
Engineering
Prereq.: Permission of instructor
G (Fall)
2-0-4 [P/D/F] H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit
10.992 Seminar in Chemical
Engineering
Prereq.: Permission of instructor
G (Spring)
2-0-4 [P/D/F] H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit
For students working on doctoral theses.
R. A. Brown
10.ThG Graduate Thesis
Prereq.: -
G (Fall, Spring, Summer)
Units arranged H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit
Program of graduate research, leading to the
writing of an S.M., Chem.E., Ph.D., or Sc.D.
thesis; to be arranged by the student and appropriate MIT faculty member.
R. E. Cohen
Descriptions of Subjects 393
