School of Science
7.93 Selected Topics in Biology
Prereq.: -
G (Fall, Spring)
Units arranged [P/D/F] H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit
Classwork in various fields of biology not
covered by the regular subjects of instruction.
Consult Biology Student Office.
7.941 Research Problems
Prereq.: -
G (Fall)
Units arranged [P/D/F] H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit
7.942 Research Problems
Prereq.: -
G (Spring)
Units arranged [P/D/F] H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit
Directed research in a field of biological
science, but not contributory to graduate thesis.
Consult Biology Student Office.
7.95 Cancer Biology
(Revised Units)
Prereq.: 7.03, 7.06, 7.08
G (Spring)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit
Intensive analysis of historical and current
developments in cancer biology. Topics
covered in lecture and through critical reading
of relevant literature include: principles of transformation, viral and cellular oncogenes, tumor
suppressor genes, tumor cell growth, and
apoptosis.
T. Jacks, J. Lees
7.96 Cell-Cell Signaling
Prereq.: -
7.98J Neural Plasticity in Learning and
Development
(Same subject as 9.301J)
Prereq.: Permission of instructor
G (Spring)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Roles of neural plasticity in learning and
memory and in development of invertebrates
and mammals. An in-depth critical analysis of
current literature of molecular, cellular, genetic,
electrophysiological, and behavioral studies.
Discussion of original papers supplemented by
introductory lectures.
S. Tonegawa, W. Quinn, M. Wilson, H. Steller
7.99 Disease Intervention Through
Biotechnology
Prereq.: Permission of instructor
G (Spring)
3-0-3 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Analyzes the flow of scientific principles from
the laboratory to the diseased patient. Concentrates on the biotechnology industry past,
present, and future. Considers science in
academia and industry and the regulatory
hurdles required to bring scientific developments to humans.
M. Gefter
G (Spring)
3-0-9 [P/D/F
A seminar focusing on recent research in the
area of intercellular communication. Topics include intracellular signal transduction by cell
surface tyrosine and serine/theonine kinase
receptors, cytokine receptors, and cell adhesion (integrin) receptors. Emphasis on techniques used in receptor research, including
mutants, and on alterations in receptor function in various pathophysiologic states.
H. Lodish, R. Rosenberg
7.97 Topics In Evolution
Prereq.: 7.05 and permission of instructor
Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: G (Spring)
2-0-7 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Seminar considering the role of evolutionary
thought in modern science. Topics include: discussion of Darwin's The Origin of Species;
molecular studies of protein evolution; roles of
neutral mutation, recombination, and sex in
evolution; the RNA world and the origin of life:
in vitro selection and "test tube evolution"; and
the interplay between biological thought and
computer science, with reference to complexity
theory, neural networks, genetic programming,
and artificial life.
C. Pabo
370 Chapter Vill
