School of Science
8.03 Physics III 8.044 Statistical Physics I 8.07 Electromagnetism I
Prereq.: 8.02 or 8.022; 18.02 Prereq.: 8.03, 18.03 Prereq.: 8.03,18.03
U (Fall, Spring) U (Spring) U (Fall)
5-0-7 REST 5-0-7 4-0-8
Mechanical vibrations and waves; simple har- Introduction to probability, statistical Survey of basic electromagnetic phenomena:
monic motion, superposition, forced vibrations mechanics, and thermodynamics. Random electrostatics, magnetostatics; electromagnetic
and resonance, coupled oscillations and nor- variables, joint and conditional probability den- properties of matter. Time-dependent
mal modes; vibrations of continuous systems; sities, functions of a random variable. Con- electromagnetic fields and Maxwell's equareflection and refraction; phase and group cepts of macroscopic variables and tions. Electromagnetic waves, emission, abvelocity. Optics; wave solutions to Maxwell's thermodynamic equilibrium, fundamental as- sorption, and scattering of radiation.
equations; polarization; Snell's Law, inter- sumption of statistical mechanics, microcanoni- Relativistic electrodynamics and mechanics.
ference, Huygens's principle, Fraunhofer dif- cal and canonical ensembles. First, second, L. Rosenberg
fraction, gratings. and third laws of thermodynamics. Numerous
Fall Term: F. Rasio examples illustrating a wide variety of physical 8.08 Statistical Physics 11
Spring Term: H. V. Bradt phenomena such as magnetism, polyatomic
gases, thermal radiation, electrons in solids, Prereq.: 8.05
8.033 Special Relativity and Classical and noise in electronic devices. Concurrent en- U (Spring)
Mechanics rollment in 8.04 is recommended. 4-0-8
(Revised Content) T. J. Greytak Probability distributions for classical and quanPrereq.: 8.01, 18.02 tum systems. Microcanonical, canonical, and
U (Fall) 8.05 Quantum Physics I1 grand canonical partition-functions and as-
5-0-7 Prereq.: 8.04 sociated thermodynamic potentials. Conditions
of thermodynamic equilibrium for homogenous
Normally taken by physics majors in their U 5 -0 (F -7 all, Spring) and heterogenous systems. Applications: nonsophomore year. Topics in relativity: Einstein's interacting Bose and Fermi gases; mean field
postulates; consequences for simultaneity, General formalism of quantum mechanics: theories for real gases, binary mixtures, magtime dilation, length contraction, clock state space, Dirac notation, representations, netic systems, polymer solutions; phase and
synchronization; Lorentz transformation; matrix mechanics. Angular momentum, mag- reaction equilibria, critical phenomena. Fluctuarelativistic effects and paradoxes; invariants netic moments, time-independent perturbation tions, correlation functions and susceptibilities,
and four-vectors; momentum, energy and theory. Applications to atomic, molecular, and Kubo formulae. Evolution of distribution funcmass; particle collisions; principle of condensed-matter systems. Perturbation tions: Boltzmann and Smoluchowski equations.
equivalence. Topics in mechanics: review of theory and the hydrogen atom: fine/hyperfine K. Huang
8.01, conservative force fields, one-dimen- structure, Stark effect, Zeeman and Paschensional motion; central forces; celestial Back effects, Rydberg atoms. Vibrational-rotamechanics; scattering cross sections; ac- tional spectrum of a diatomic molecule using
celerated coordinate systems; Lagrange's Born-Oppenheimer approximation. Van der
equations and applications; conservation laws; Waals interaction in the H2 molecule. The Undergraduate Laboratory
rigid body motion. Credit cannot be received electron in a one-dimensional periodic poten- and Special Project Subjects
for 8.20 if credit for 8.033 is or had been tial: Bloch's theorem, band structure.
received in the same or prior terms. Fall Term: R. L. Jaffe
M. Baranger Spring Term: T. Imai 8.12 Physics Project Laboratory
Prereq.: 8.04 Quantum Physics I 8.059 Quantum Physics Ill
Prereq.: 8.03 or 6.014; 18.03 Prereq.: 8.05
U (Fall, Spring) U (Spring)
5-0-7 REST 5-0-7
Experimental basis of quantum physics: Further development of quantum mechanics
photoelectric effect, Compton scattering, and applications to physical systems. Scatterphotons, Franck-Hertz experiment, the Bohr ing theory: Rutherford scattering, inelastic scatatom, electron diffraction, deBroglie waves, tering, optical theorem. Identical particles:
wave-particle duality of matter and light. Intro- fermions and bosons. Degenerate Fermi matduction to wave mechanics: Schroedinger's ter: collapsed stars, quark matter, metals, inequation, wave functions, wave packets, prob- sulators, and semiconductors. Thomas-Fermi
ability amplitudes, stationary states, the model of atoms. Hartree-Fock method: helium
Heisenberg uncertainty principle and zero- atom, atomic shell model, periodic table.
point energies. Solutions to Schroedinger's Models of nuclei and hadrons. Time-dependequation in one dimension: transmission and ent perturbation theory: sudden and harmonic
reflection at a barrier, barrier penetration, perturbations, Fermi's golden rule, electric and
potential wells, the simple harmonic oscillator. magnetic multipole transitions, radiative decay,
Schroedinger's equation in three dimensions: M~ssbauer effect. Superconductivity and the
central potentials, introduction to hydrogenic Josephson effect.
systems. R. L. Jaffe
Fall Term: U. Wiese
Spring Term: T. A. Arias
-
U (Spring)
1-6-5 Institute LAB
Offers an opportunity for students to carry out
experimental projects based on their own
curiosity, interests, and ideas to study physical
phenomena, including optics, acoustics, magnetism, and quantum effects. Faculty help students to determine the feasibility of proposed
projects and provide guidance in experimental
techniques, data acquisition, error analysis
and physical interpretation of results. Prior experience in a laboratory environment is not required. Not usable as a restricted elective by
Physics majors.
R. K. Yamamoto
372 Chapter Vill
