Department of Physics Course 8
8.122 Advanced Project Laboratory
Prereq.: 8.02
U (IAP)
1-5-3
Laboratory subject that offers students the opportunity to carry out experimental physics
projects of their own design. Emphasizes contemporary ideas in laboratory techniques and
the use of on-line data acquisition, whenever
possible. Projects designed by students are
based on physics phenomena they have en- countered in coursework or on their own.
Faculty teach students how to use various
laboratory instruments, how to cope with possible systematic errors in their results, and how
to determine statistical errors from numerical
dlata.
R. K. Yamamoto
8.13 Experimental Physics I
Prereq.: 8.04
U (Fall)
0-6-12 Institute LAB
8.14 Experimental Physics II
Prereq.: 8.05, 8.13
U (Spring)
0-6-12 Institute LAB
About five fundamental laboratory experiments
carried out each term, covering most aspects
of modern physics relating to names such as
Rutherford, Franck-Hertz, Hall, Ramsauer,
Doppler, Fraunhofer, Faraday, Mossbauer,
Compton, Stern-Gerlach. Stresses basic experimental techniques and data analyses, and
written and oral presentation of experiment
results. Second term requires knowledge of
quantum mechanics at the 8.05 level. 12 units
may be applied to the General Institute
Laboratory Requirement.
G. W. Clark
8.18 Special Problems in Undergraduate
Physics
Prereq.: -
U (Fall, lAP, Spring)
Units arranged
Can be repeated for credit
Opportunity for undergraduates to engage in
experimental or theoretical research under the
supervision of a staff member. Specific approval required in each case.
Information: J. W. Belcher.
8.19 Readings in Physics
Prereq.: -
Undergraduate Elective
Subjects
8.20 Introduction to Special Relativity
Prereq.: 8.01, 8.02, 18.01
U (IAP)
2-0-7 REST
Reviews nineteenth-century science leading to
special relativity, Einstein's approach to
science and postulates of relativity, Lorentz
transformation, length contraction and time
dilation, four vectors and transformations of
four vectors, Lorentz invariants, relativistic
energy and momentum, relativisitic kinematics
and collisions, massless particles, Doppler
shift, space-time diagrams, relativity
paradoxes, the impact of relativity. This subject
is aimed at the freshman and sophomore
level. Not usable as a restricted elective by
Physics majors. Credit cannot be received for
8.20 if credit for 8.033 is or has been received
in the same or prior terms.
S. A. Rappaport
8.21 Classical Mechanics 11
(Revised Content)
Prereq.: 8.033, 18.02
U (IAP)
2-0-4
Continuation of 8.033, containing the more
theoretical topics. Normally taken by physics
majors in their sophomore year. Hamilton's
Principle. Linear mechanics with applications
to continuous media. Hamiltonian formulation.
Liouville's theorem. Action-angle variables in
one dimension. Poisson brackets. Canonical
transformations. Noether's theorem. Integrable
vs non-integrable systems.
M. Baranger
8.231 Physics of Solids I
Pre req.: 8.044, 8.211 or 8.05
U (Fall)
4-0-8
Introduction to the basic concepts of the qua
U (Fall, IAP, Spring)
Units arranged [P/D/F]
Can be repeated for credit
Supervised reading and library work. Choice of
material and allotment of time according to individual needs. For students who want to do
work not provided for in the regular subjects.
Specific approval required in each case.
Information: J. W. Belcher.
-
8.235 Superconductivity
Prereq.: 8.04, 8.044
Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: U (IAP)
2-0-4
Experiments and phenomenology. A qualitative introduction to perfect conductance and
perfect diamagnetism; thermodynamics and
the energy gap; electron (Cooper) pairing; Bardeen-Cooper-Schrieffer theory; quasiparticles;
phase transition and free energy; suppression of Coulomb repulsion; Type I and I superconductors; vortices, coherence, and penetration
lengths; lower and upper critical fields; Landau
theory; critical phenomena; Ginzburg criterion;
liquid crystal analogs; high Tc superconductivity.
A. N. Berker
8.242 Quantum Electronics and Laser
Spectroscopy
Prereq.: 8.04 or 6.017
Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: U (Spring)
3-1-8
Fundamental processes in lasers and their applications to studying physical properties of
atoms and molecules. Interaction of classical
and quantum systems with electromagnetic
radiation. The physics of two-level atoms.
Laser oscillators. Techniques in nonlinear
spectroscopy, such as stimulated Raman effect, free induction decay, optical nutation,
photon echoes, and CARS. As part of the curriculum, each student is required to carry out a
laboratory project. Familiarity with Maxwell's
equations and the Schroedinger equation is required.
M. S. Feld
8.243 Modern Optics
Prereq.: 8.03
Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: U (Fall)
3-0-9
Nature of light, wave/particle duality. Polarization. Propagation of plane waves in isotropic
tumn theory of solids. Topics: periodic structure
and anisotropic media, optical constants. Magand symmetry of crystals; diffraction; reciproneto- and electro-optical effects. Reflection
cal lattice; chemical bonding; lattice dynamics,
phonons, thermal properties; free electron gas; and refraction at an interface between two
media. Fresnel equations. Interference, Michel- model of metals; Bloch theorem and band
son, and Fabry-Perot interferometers, Fourier
structure, nearly free electron approximation;
transform spectroscopy. Multilayer thin films.
tight binding method; Fermi surface; semiconFresnel and Fraunhofer diffraction, diffraction
ductors, electrons, holes, impurities; optical
gratings. Ray optics. Optical resonators, Gausproperties, excitons; magnetism.
sian beams. Lasers, threshold condition, comT. J. Greytak mon laser systems. Fourier optics, spatial
filtering. Holography, binary optics, micro-optics. Nonlinear optics, effects of second- and
third-order nonlinear susceptibility. Fiber optics. Optical detectors. Optical instruments.
R. Aggarwal
Descriptions of Subjects 373
