Department of Biology Course 7
7.37J Molecular and Engineering Aspects
of Biotechnology
(Same subject as 10.441J)
Prereq.: 7.03 or 7.05, 5.60
Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: U (Spring)
4-0-8
Biological and bioengineering principles for
utilization of animal cells and bacteria for
production of recombinant protein products:
post-translational processing and secretion of
proteins; gene cloning and expression in mammalian cells; physiology of cell growth and in
vitro cultivation; bioreactor design; protein
recovery and purification; site-specific mutation
of proteins; transgenic animals and plants.
D. I. C. Wang, H. Lodish
7.391 Special Problems for Undergraduates
Prereq.: -
U (Fall, Spring)
Units arranged
Can be repeated for credit
Used for students receiving Advanced Placement credit and transfer credit. Program of
study or research to be arranged with a Department faculty member. Written report required.
Permission of Department required.
Consult Biology Student Office.
7.40 Biotechnology: Engineering of
Macromolecules
Prereq.: 7.05
U (Spring)
3-0-6
Fundamentals of genetics and biochemical
principles for the synthesis, design, and engineering of biopolymers such as polyesters
and polysaccharides. Principles underlying
structure-function properties of biopolymers.
Topics include conformation analysis and
molecular properties of polymer chains in solution.
C. K. Rha, A. J. Sinskey
7.411-7.419 Seminars in Biological
Oceanography
Prereq.: Permission of instructor
G (Fall, Spring)
Units arranged [P/D/F] H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit
Selected topics in biological oceanography.
Information: A. L. Peirson (Woods Hole Staff).
7.421 Special Problems in Biological
Oceanography
Prereq.: -
7.431 Topics in Marine Ecology 7.438 Topics in the Behavior of Marine
Animals
Prereq.: Permission of instructor
G (Fall, Spring) Prereq.: Permission of instructor
2-0-4 H-LEVEL Grad Credit G (Fall, Spring)
Can be repeated for credit 2-0-4 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit Lectures and discussions on ecological principles and processes in marine populations, Lectures and discussion on the behavioral biolcommunities, and ecosystems. Topics vary ogy of marine animals. Topics vary from year
from year to year. to year.
H. Caswell, R. Harbison (WHOI) P. Tyack
7.432 Topics in Marine Physiology and 7.439 Topics in Marine Microbiology
Biochemistry
Prereq.: Permission of instructor
Prereq.: Permission of instructor G (Fall, Spring)
G (Fall, Spring) 2-0-4 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
2-0-4 H-LEVEL Grad Credit Can be repeated for credit
Can be repeated for credit
Lectures and discussion on the biology of
Lectures and discussions on physiological and marine prokaryotes. Topics vary from year to
biochemical processes in marine organisms. year.
Topics vary from year to year. P. Dunlap, J. Waterbury (WHOI)
H. Hahn, J. McDowell, J. Stegeman (WHOI)
7.47 Biological Oceanography
7.434 Topics in Zooplankton Biology Prereq.: Advanced level training in biology
Prereq.: Permission of instructor G (Spring)
G (Fall, Spring) 3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
2-0-4 H-LEVEL Grad Credit Intensive overview of biological oceanography.
Can be repeated for credit Major biological paradigms and processes disLectures and discussions on the biology of cussed, and dependence of biological procesmarine zooplankton. Topics vary from year to ses in the ocean on physical and chemical
year. aspects of the environment examined. SurL. Madin (WHOI) veys the diversity of marine habitats, major
groups of taxa inhabiting those habitats, and
7.435 Topics in Benthic Biology the general biology of the various taxa: the
production, consumption, burial, and
Prereq.: Permission of instructor remineralization of organic material in the
G (Fall, Spring) ocean, as well as factors controlling those
2-0-4 H-LEVEL Grad Credit processes. Structure of marine food webs and
Can be repeated for credit the flow of energy within different marine
Lectures and discussions on the biology of habitats detailed and contrasted.
marine benthos. Topics vary from year to year. D. Caron (WHOI)
L. Mullineaux, R. Scheltema (WHOI)
7.491 Research in Biological
7.436 Topics in Phytoplankton Biology Oceanography
Prereq.: Permission of instructor Prereq.:
G (Fall, Spring)
2-0-4 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit
Lectures and discussion on the biology of
marine phytoplankton. Topics vary from year
to year.
R. Olson, H. Sosik, D. Anderson (WHOI)
7.437 Topics in Molecular Biological
Oceanography
Prereq.: Permission of instructor
G (Fall, Spring)
2-0-4 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
G (Fall, Spring) Can be repeated for credit
Units arranged [P/D/F] H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit Lectures and discussion on molecular biological oceanography. Topics vary from year to
Advanced problems in biological oceanog- year.
raphy with assigned reading and consultation.
Information: A. L. Peirson (Woods Hole Staff).
-
G (Fall, Spring)
Units arranged [P/D/F] H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit
Directed research in biological oceanography
not leading to graduate thesis and generally
done before the qualifying examination. Possible areas include population dynamics,
physiology, and cytology of marine microorganisms; physiology, nutrition, and productivity
of phytoplankton; influence of organisms on
the composition of seawater; systematics,
physiology, and ecology of pelagic larvae,
zooplankton, benthos, and mesopelagic
fishes; physiology and migration of large
fishes; diving physiology; and use of sound by
marine mammals.
(Woods Hole Staff)
Descriptions of Subjects 367
