School of Architecture and Planning
Course 11 Urban Studies and
Planning
For degree requirements, see listing in
Chapter VII under the School of
Architecture and Planning.
Undergraduate Subjects
IntroduCtory Subjects
11.001J Introduction to Urban Design and
Development
(Same subject as 4.250J)
Prereq.: -
U (Fall)
3-0-9 HASS
Examines both the structure of the cities and
ways that they can be changed. Includes historical forces that have produced cities,
models of urban analysis, contemporary
theory of urban design, and implementation
strategies. A series of core lectures focuses on
student work. Speakers present cases, involving current projects, which illustrate the scope
and methods of urban design practice.
L. Vale
11.002 Introduction to Public Policy
Analysis and Government Action
Prereq.: -
U (Spring)
3-1-8 HASS
Presents major analytic techniques of public
policy analysis: deterministic and probabilistic
models, cost-benefit analysis, decision
analysis, linear programming. Class sessions
organized in order of main tasks of policy
analyst: identifying alternatives, implementation, evaluation. Compares alternative approaches to public policy analysis.
Consult Department Headquarters.
11.007J Controversies in Public Policy
(Same subject as 17.201J)
Prereq.: -
11.011 The Art and Science of Negotiation
Prereq.:
U (Spring)
3-0-9 HASS
Introduction to political aspects of public policy.
Considers philosophical rationales for government action and the evolution of public policy
in America; the policy-making process; basic
strategies of public policy, including markets,
government regulation, mass persuasion; and
ways of analyzing the impacts of public
policies - social indicators, cost/benefit
analysis, evaluation of distributive equity, and
unintended consequences.
L. E. Susskind
-
U (Fall)
3-0-9 HASS
Drawing on lessons of game theory and
decision analysis, this subject presents a
strategic view of negotiation. The paradoxical
nature of bargaining power, coalition behavior,
and asymmetries of communication are closely
examined. The value (and limits) of this discipline are examined and critiqued in a variety
of real-world applications, including international conflict, environmental disputes, and pleabargaining. All students participate in a series
of simulations designed to sharpen their
analytic and creative skills.
Consult Department Headquarters.
11.013J American Urban History I
(Same subject as 21H.231J)
Prereq.: -
U (Fall)
3-0-6 HASS
Seminar on the history of institutions and institutional change in urban America from
roughly 1890 to the present. Among the institutions considered are political machines, police
departments, schools, courts, hospitals,
prisons, welfare departments, and universities.
Focuses on readings and discussions.
R. M. Fogelson
11.014J American Urban History 11
(Same subject as 21 H.232J)
Prereq.: -
U (Spring)
3-0-6 HASS
Seminar on the history of selected features of
the physical environment of urban America.
Among the features considered are parks,
cemeteries, tenements, suburbs, zoos,
skyscrapers, department stores, supermarkets, and amusement parks. Focuses on
readings and discussions.
R. M. Fogelson
11.015J Riots, Strikes, and Conspiracies in
American History
(Same subject as 21H.104J)
Prereq.: -
11.018 Solving the Infrastructure Crisis
Prereq.:
U (Fall)
3-0-9 HASS-D, Category 5
See description under subject 21H.104J.
R. M. Fogelson
-
U (Spring)
3-0-9 HASS
Examines the influence of infrastructure planning and development on cities and regions.
Identifies the political, physicai, and economic
forces that influence the construction (and
maintenance) of roads, bridges, water and
sewer lines, etc. Considers different strategies
for repairing crumbling infrastructure, including
privatization.
P. Levy
11.020 Poverty, Public Policy, and
Controversy
(Revised Content and Units)
Prereq.: -
U (Fall)
3-0-9 HASS-D, Category 4
Introductory subject to the study of poverty in
the United States, viewed from an international
perspective. Much social controversy in the
1990s has been concerned with how society
should respond to poverty, and the related issues of welfare, out-of-wedlock births, homelessness, crime, and drugs. Subject
investigates how particular societal findings
are brought to controversies. Examines both
knowledge about poverty and related behaviors from social science research and how
this knowledge is incorporated into public discourse. Experience of other countries is introduced to make explicit the assumptions on
which American approaches to poverty are
based.
M. Rein
11.022J American Living Standards and
Income Inequality
(Subject meets with 11.450, 14.65J)
Prereq.: 14.01 or equivalent
U (Spring)
3-0-9 HASS
Provides students with an integrated overview
of the contemporary US economy, including
trends in living standards and income inequality, productivity within the manufacturing
and service sectors, savings and investment,
the federal budget deficit, and the changing nature of the poverty population. Applies recent
economic research and economic data sources to the study of current economic problems.
Meets with graduate subject 11.450, but assignments differ.
F S. Levy
394 Chapter Vill
