School of Engineering
10.27 Chemical Engineering Processes 10.32 Separation Processes 10.34 Numerical Methods Applied to
Laboratory Chemical Engineering
Prereq.: 10.213, 10.302
Prereq.: 10.32, 10.37 U (Spring) Prereq.: 10.33
U (Fall) 3-0-9 G (Spring)
0-8-4 3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
General principles of separation oy equilibrium
Introduces practical chemical engineering unit and rate processes. Staged cascades. Applica- Numerical methods for solving problems arisoperations through hands-on experience with tions to distillation, absorption, adsorption, and ing in heat and mass transfer, fluid mechanics,
pilot-scale equipment and processes. Intended membrane processes. Phase equilibria and and chemical reaction engineering. Topics:
to provide instruction in experimentation and role of diffusion. numerical linear algebra, solution of nonlinear
data analysis. Introduces theory of selected C. M. Mohr algebraic equations and ordinary differential
unit operations. Emphasis on developing oral equations, and finite-difference and finite-eleand written communication skills. 10.33 Analytical Treatment of Chemical ment methods for elliptic and parabolic partial
J.-F. Hamel, J. B. Howard Engineering Transport Processes differential equations. All methods presented
in context of problems arising in transport
10.301 Fluid Mechanics Prereq.: 10.301, 18.03 phenomena. Lectures and assignments asG (Fall) sume knowledge of FORTRAN.
Prereq.: 18.03, 10.001 3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit R. A. Brown
U (Spring)
Mathematical techniques underlying transport
3-0-9 REST
problems basic to most chemical engineering 10.341 Finite Element Methods for
Introduces the mechanical principles govern- processes. Quaternions, vectors, polyadics, Problems in Transport Phenomena
ing fluid flow. Stress in a fluid. Conservation of Cartesian tensors, general tensors, curvilinear
Prereq.: 10.34
mass and momentum, using differential and in- coordinate systems. Representations of rota- G (Fall)
tegral balances. Elementary constitutive equa- tion and orientation. Anisotropic material ten-
3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
tions. Hydrostatics. Exact solutions of the sor properties. Applications to the derivation of
Navier-Stokes equations. Approximate solu- transport equations in physical space, at inter- Advanced methods for solving problems in
tions using control volume analysis. Mechani- faces, along lines, and in multidimensional fluid mechanics and heat and mass transfer.
cal energy balances and Bernoulli's equation. phase spaces. Emphasis on efficient techniques for handling
Dimensional analysis and dynamic similarity. H. Brenner highly irregular boundaries, nonlinearities, comIntroduces boundary-layer theory and tur- plicated boundary conditions, and singularities.
bulence. 10.331 Nonlinear Analysis in Chemical Variational, Galerkin, and collocation schemes
W. M. Deen, P. S. Virk Engineering discussed.
R. A. Brown
Prereq.: 10.50
10.302 Transport Processes
G (Spring)
10.37 Chemical Kinetics and Reactor
Prereq.: 5.60, 10.301 3-0-6
Design
U (Fall)
Emphasizes both classical and modern
4-0-8 Prereq.: 5.60, 10.301
methods for analyzing nonlinear ordinary and
U (Spring)
Principles of heat and mass transfer. Steady partial differential equations arising in reaction 3-0-6
and transient conduction and diffusion. Con- engineering and transport phenomena. Topics:
vective transport of heat and mass in both elementary stability theory and bifurcation Introduces design of commercial chemical
laminar and turbulent flows. Natural convec- analysis of steady states; introduction to time- reactors, emphasizing synthesis of chemical
tion. Condensation and boiling. Application to periodic phenomena and transitions to chaos; kinetics, transport phenomena. Topics: kinetics
design of heat exchangers. Radiative heat numerical methods for tracking multiple-steady and equilibrium - elementary steps, transitiontransfer. and time-periodic states. state theory, multistep reactions. Ideal
L. G. Cima, K. A. Smith, Gr. Stephanopoulos R. A. Brown reactors - batch, plug flow, well-stirred;
residence-time distributions. Transport in reac-
10.31 Separations and the Environment 10.332 Linear Operator Theory in Chemical tors - heat and mass transfer, diffusion to
Engineering Science and within catalyst particles. Reactor design;
Prereq.: Permission of instructor reactor size; modeling of performance.
Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered Prereq.: 18.03, 18.06, or equivalent C. L. Cooney, J. Y. Ying
Acad Year 1997-98: G (Fall) G (Fall)
3-0-6 3-0-6
10.390 Process Design
Separations technology as applied to environ- Introduction to linear operator theory. Set
Prereq.: 5.11, 10.213, 10.301
mental remediation and pollution control. theory, metric and linear spaces. Inner product
U (Fall)
Sources of pollution and contaminated environ- and Hilbert spaces, orthogonality, adjoint and 3-0-9
ments: industrial effluents and emissions, self-adjoint operators, spectral representation
domestic sources, run-offs, in the atmosphere, theory, Green's functions, and Sturm-Liouville Presentation and discussion of process design
surface water, ground water, and soils. Chemi- operators. Applications to problems in partial case studies, selected from a variety of areas
cal and physical properties of pollutants, par- differential equations and control theory. in which chemical engineers work. Emphasis
titioning and distribution in the environment. T. A. Hatton, R. A. Brown on the applications of engineering science to
Separations involving dilute aqueous streams, the solution of real problems, including concepgas mixtures, recoverable organic products. In tual design and analysis leading to optimal
situ remediation of contaminated waste sites. solutions. Discussion of the trade-offs inherent
T. A. Hatton in design, including economics, environmental
impact, and contextual issues. Review of required engineering science and presentation
of the basics of process economics.
C. M. Mohr
386 Chapter Vill
