School of Engineering
10.805J Technology, Law, and the Working
Environment
(Same subject as 15.656J, TPP.35J)
Prereq.: -
Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: G (Fall)
3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Addresses relationship between technology-related problems and the law applicable to work
environment. National Labor Relations Act, Occupational Safety and Health Act. Toxic Substances Control Act, state worker's
compensation, and suits by workers in the
courts discussed. Problems related to occupational health and safety, collective bargaining
as a mechanism for altering technology in the
workplace, job alienation, productivity, and the
organization of work addressed. Prior courses
or experience in the environmental, public
health, or law-related areas.
N. A. Ashford, C. C. Caldart
10.806 Management in Engineering
Prereq.: -
10.81 (10.83) School of Chemical General
Engineering Practice - Communication
Skills and Human Relations - West Point
Station 10.90 Independent Research Problem
Prereq.: Permission of instructor, 10.80 (10.82) Prereq.: Permission of instructor
G (Fall, Spring, Summer) G (Fall, Spring, Summer)
0-6-0 H-LEVEL Grad Credit Units arranged H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit
Conducted at the Merck & Company Inc.
facility in West Point, Pennsylvania. Group For special and graduate students who wish to
problem assignments include process develop- carry out some minor investigation in a parment, design, simulation and control, technical ticular field. Subject and hours to fit individual
service, and new-product development. Grad- requirements.
ing based on communication skills and human R. E. Cohen
relations in group assignments. Credit granted
in lieu of master's thesis; see departmental 10.910 Independent Research Problem
description on School of Chemical Engineering
Prereq.:
Practice in Chapter 7 for details. Enrollment
limited and subject to plant availability.
T. A. Hatton
10.84 (10.86) School of Chemical
Engineering Practice - Technical
Accomplishment - Midland Station
Prereq.: Permission of instructor, 10.85 (10.87)
U (Fall) G (Fall, Spring, Summer)
3-0-9 0-6-0 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Engineering School-Wide Elective Subject. Conducted at the research laboratories and
Description given at end of this chapter in manufacturing facilities of the Dow Chemical
SWE section on page 562. Company in Midland, Michigan. Group probJ.-H. Chun lem assignments include process development, design, simulation and control, technical
10.816 Engineering Risk-Benefit service, and new-product development. GradAnalysis ing based on technical accomplishment. Credit
granted in lieu of master's thesis; see
Prereq.: 18.02 departmental description on School of ChemiG (Spring) cal Engineering Practice in Chapter 7 for
3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit details. Enrollment limited and subject to plant
Engineering School-Wide Elective Subject. availability.
Description given at end of this chapter in T. A. Hatton
SWE section on page 999.
G. Apostolakis, A. W. Drake, A. R. Odoni 10.85 (10.87) School of Chemical
Engineering Practice - Communication
Skills and Human Relations - Midland
Station
School of Chemical Prereq.: Permission of instructor, 10.84 (10.86)
G (Fall, Spring, Summer)
Engineering Practice 0-6-0 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Conducted at the research laboratories and
10.80 (10.82) School of Chemical manufacturing facilities of the Dow Chemical
Engineering Practice - Technical Company in Midland, Michigan. Group probAccomplishment - West Point Station lem assignments include process development
design, simulation and control, technical serPrereq.: Permission of instructor, 10.81 (10.83) vice, and new-product development. Credit
G (Fall, Spring, Summer) granted in lieu of master's thesis; see
0-6-0 H-LEVEL Grad Credit departmental description on School of ChemiConducted at the Merck & Company Inc. cal Engineering Practice in Chapter 7 for
facility in West Point, Pennsylvania. Group details. Enrollment limited and subject to plant
problem assignments include process develop- availability.
ment design, simulation and control, technical T. A. Hatton
service, and new-product development. Grading based on technical accomplishment. Credit
granted in lieu of master's thesis; see
departmental description on School of Chemical Engineering Practice in Chapter 7 for
details. Enrollment limited and subject to plant
availability.
T. A. Hatton
-
U (Fall, IAP, Spring, Summer)
Units arranged
Can be repeated for credit
10.911 Independent Research Problem
Prereq.: -
U (Fall, lAP, Spring, Summer)
Units arranged [P/D/F]
Can be repeated for credit
For undergraduates who wish to do a special
investigation or special topic in a particular
field. Topic and hours arranged.
C. M. Mohr
10.920 Indepartmental Seminar in
Nanostructured Materials
Prereq.: Permission of instructor
G (Spring)
2-0-4 [P/D/F]
Can be repeated for credit
Research seminars on the synthesis, structural
characterization, and application of nanostructured materials. Presentations by faculty and
students from Departments of Chemical Engineering, Chemistry, Electrical Engineering
and Computer Science, and Materials Science
and Engineering engaging in studies of
nanocrystallites, clusters, thin films, and quantum dots. Open to students interested in an interdisciplinary approach to ultrafine materials
processing.
J. Y. Ying
10.94 Special Problems in Chemical
Engineering
Prereq.: Permission of instructor
U (Fall, Spring)
Units arranged
Can be repeated for credit
Problem of current interest, varying from year
to year.
C. L. Cooney
10.940J Seminar on Pharmaceutical and
Biotechnology Industry Management
(Same subject as 15.138J, 7.89J)
Prereq.: Permission of instructor
G (Fall)
3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit
See description under subject 15.138J.
T. J. Allen, C. L. Cooney, S. N. Finkelstein,
A. Sinskey
391 Chapter Vill
