Department of Physics Course 8
8.614J Introduction to Plasma 8.641 Physics of High-Energy Nuclear and Particle Physics
Physics I1 Plasmas I
(Same subject as 6.652J, 22.612J) Prereq.: 8.613J 8.701 Introduction to Nuclear and Particle
Prereq.: 6.651 J or 8.613J or 22.61 1J Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered Physics
G (Spring) Acad Year 1997-98: G (Fall)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit 3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit Prereq.: 8.323
G (Fall)
Linear waves and instabilities in magnetized 8.642 Physics of High-Energy 3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
plasma; solutions of Vlasov-Maxwell equations Plasmas II
in homogeneous and inhomogeneous plas- The phenomenology and experimental foundamas; conservation principles for energy and Prereq.: 8.613J tions of particle and nuclear physics; the funmomentum; quasi-linear theory and nonlinear Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered damental forces and particles, composites.
stabilization; solitons and coherent nonlinear Acad Year 1997-98: G (Fall) Interactions of particles with matter, detectors.
phenomena; collisions and discrete particle ef- 3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit SU(2), SU(3), models of mesons and baryons.
fects; fluctuations in a stable plasma; Fokker- Basic concepts of plasmas, with temperatures QED, weak interactions, parity violation, leptonPlanck equation and transport phenomena. of thermonuclear interest, relevant to fusion re- nucleon scattering, structure functions. QCD,
P. Catto search and astrophysics. Microscopic gluon field and color. W and Z fields, electrotransport processes due to inter-particle col- weak unification, the CKM matrix. Nucleon-
8.624 Plasma Waves lisions and collective modes (e.g., nucleon interactions, properties of nuclei,
microinstabilities). Relevant macroscopic single and collective particle models. Electron
Prereq.: 8.613J transport coefficients (electrical resistivity, ther- and hadron interactions with nuclei. Relativistic
Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered mal conductivities, particle "diffusion"). heavy ion collisions, transition to quark-gluon
Acad Year 1997-98: G (Spring) Runaway and slide-away regimes. Magnetic plasma.
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit reconnection processes and their relevance to L. Osborne
Comprehensive theory of electromagnetic experimental observations. Radiation emission
waves in a magnetized plasma. Wave from inhomogeneous plasmas. Conditions for 8.711 Nuclear Physics
propagation in cold and hot plasmas. Energy thermonuclear burning and ignition (D-T and Prereq.: 8.321, 8.701
flow. Absorption by Landau and cyclotron "advanced" fusion reactions, plasmas with G (Spring)
damping and by transit time magnetic pumping polarized nuclei). Role of "impurity" nuclei. 4-0-8 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
(TTMP). Wave propagation in inhomogeneous "Finite-p" (pressure) regimes and ballooning
plasma: accessibility, WKB theory, mode con- modes. Convective modes in configuration Experimental foundations and theory of the
version, connection formulae, Budden tunnel- and velocity space. Trapped particle regimes. structure of nucleons and nuclei. Nucleon exing. Applications to RF plasma heating, wave Nonlinear and explosive instabilities. Interac- cited states, form factors. Nucleon-nucleon inpropagation in the ionosphere and laser-plas- tion of positive and negative energy modes. teraction, few body systems, mesonic current
ma interactions. Wave propagation in toroidal Each subject can be taken independently. and quark effects. Electromagnetic and hadron
plasmas, and applications to ion cyclotron B. Coppi scattering from nucleons and nuclei with em-
(ICRF), electron cyclotron (ECRH), and lower phasis on spin degrees of freedom. Manyhybrid (LHH) wave heating. Quasi-linear 8.681, 8.682 Selected Topics in Fluid and body physics, nuclear saturation, shell and
theory and applications to RF current drive in Plasma Physics collective models, correlations, electromagtokamaks. Extensive discussion of relevant ex- netic transitions, giant resonances, sum rules,
perimental observations. Prereq.: 8.613J weak interactions. Inclusive and exclusive
M. Porkolab, P. Bonoli G (Fall, Spring) processes at intermediate and high energies,
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit quark degrees of freedom. Relativistic heavy
Can be repeated for credit ion physics, high-temperature QCD, phase
Presentation of topics of current interest, with transition, quark-gluon plasma. Nuclear
content varying from year to year. Subject not astrophysics.
routinely offered; given when interest is indi- E. Lomon
cated.
Information: M. Porkolab. 8.712 Advanced Topics in Nuclear
Physics
Prereq.: 8.711 or permission of instructor
G (Spring)
4-0-8 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit
Medium-energy physics (Spring 1996):
Nuclear and nucleon structure and dynamics
studied with medium- and high-energy probes
(neutrinos, photons, electrons, nucleons,
pions, and kaons). Studies of the weak and
strong interactions.
Information: T. W. Donnelly.
Descriptions of Subjects 377
