Department of Urban Studies and Planning Course 11
11.223 Introduction to Modes of
Argumentation and Writing for Professional
Planning
(New)
Prereq.. -
G (Spring)
2-0-7
Introductory subject in preparation for writing
the thesis or dissertation, required of first-year
students who are not exempted on the basis of
their performance in the department's writing
assessment, and open to others as an elective. Reviews the essential principles of exposition in English, focusing on the research essay
as the primary vehicle for developing policy
positions and ideas. Students encouraged to
focus on consideration of purpose and
audience; exploring topics; planning and drafting; revising and editing; and constructing and
analyzing arguments. Problems encountered
particularly by multilingual students also addressed as needed.
J. Morrison
11.225 Modes of Argumentation and
Writing for Advanced Students
(New)
Prereq.: -
G (Fall, Spring)
3-0-6
Advanced subject in the principles and practices of analyzing, devising, and framing arguments in the context of writing about public
issues and policies, open to advanced M.C.P.
and Ph.D. students. Argumentation approached from rhetorical, social, dialectical,
and heuristic points of view. Students develop
a research-based term paper, which for
M.C.P. students can be part of their thesis,
and for Ph.D. candidates either their first-year
paper or a portion of their dissertation.
J. Morrison
11.232 The Uses of Social Science for
Social Change
(Revised Units)
Prereq.: -
11.233 Introduction to Research Design
and Methodology
(New)
Prereq.:
G (Spring)
2-0-7
Examines the ways that research has been
used and can be used to promote and support
change in policy and practice. The social sciences provide theory, ideas, and empirical
evidence to justify new policy initiatives and
revise old ones.
M. Rein
-
G (Fall)
3-0-9
For graduate students planning independent
research projects. Offers an overview of the
most common types of research design and
analytical strategies employed in the social
sciences, including survey research, ethnography, and comparative historical methods.
Particular attention to the strengths and limitations of qualitative and quantitative approaches, and to ensuring that research
questions drive the methodology and not the
other way around. The main class requirement
is a research proposal. Students select a topic,
review the relevant literature, and identify and
justify the kinds of resources and methods appropriate to their respective studies.
A. Cintr6n
11.234 Making Sense: Qualitative Methods
in Environmental Design
Prereq.: -
11.237 Gender, Work, and Public Policy
(New)
(Subject meets with SP.470)
Prereq.:
G (Spring)
2-4-6
Surveys uses of qualitative methods in environmental design practice and research. Topics include: observing environments and physical
traces, observing environmental behavior,
asking questions, focused interviews, standardized questionnaires, use of written archival
materials, use of visual materials including
photographs and maps, case studies, and
comparative methods. Emphasizes use of
each of these skills to collect and make sense
of qualitative data.
L. Vale
11.235 Analyzing Projects and
Organizations
(Revised Units)
Prereq.: 11.205
G (Fall)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Seminar builds analytic skills for evaluating
programs and projects, the organizations that
carry them out, and their environment covers
1) using proxy indicators where data are poor
and time is short; 2) preparing for, conducting,
and interpreting interviews; 3) conducting
cross-project and cross-organization comparisons; and 4) seeing the rationality in seemingly chaotic organizational and project
environments. Desirable for students preparing for Master's or Ph.D. theses.
J. Tendler
-
G (Spring)
3-0-9
Women workers rarely appear in labor market
theory. When they do, they are represented as
a separate category, determined by biological
differences and their family responsibilities.
Subject examines the status of working
women under a variety of governmental
policies and labor conditions. First part is a survey of key debates on sex and gender differences in employment and wages. Using the
changing structure of the US labor force as an
example, second part examines attempted
policy responses to the increasing feminization
of the labor force. Students apply theoretical issues to a policy topic of their choice (e.g.,
familiy leave, unionization, tax credit, or income support, etc.).
A. Cintr6n
11.251 The Policy-Making Process
Prereq.: -
Acad Year 1996-97: G (Spring)
Acad Year 1997-98: Not offered
2-0-7
Focuses on the process by which public policy
is made. Organized as a cooperative venture
by students and intended to build on their interest in and knowledge of different policy
arenas. The readings include case studies of
policy making and attempts by authors to
describe the process by which public policy is
made. The intent is to help students develop
their own perspective on this process.
M. Rein
11.254 Public Sector Economics for
Planners
Prereq.: 11.210
Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: G (Fall)
3-0-9
Develops basic concepts of public finance
theory, including public goods, externalities,
tax incidence, and distributional equity, as they
apply to decentralized government institutions
in today's changing fiscal environment. Focus
is on revenue generation, service provision,
and intergovernmental fiscal relations. Options
for improving state and local government performance through tax reform, increased cost
recovery, and alternative service delivery arrangements, such as private sector involvement in
traditional "public" sector functions, are considered.
P. Smoke
Descriptions of Subjects 397
