School of Science
8.276 Nuclear and Particle Physics 8.287J Observational Techniques of
Prereq.: 8.05 Optical Astronomy
Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered (Same subject as 12.410J)
Acad Year 1997-98: U (Spring) Prereq.: One subject in Astronomy or
4-0-8 Astrophysics
U (Fall)
A modern view of the fundamental structure of 2-4-6 Institute LAB
matter. Starting from a model that views
"quarks" as basic building blocks of mesons See description under subject 12.410J.
and baryons, the properties and interactions of J. L. Elliot
these particles are established. Quantum numbers and multiplet structure of particle families. 8.289 Techniques of Radio Astronomy
Nuclei as multibaryon systems: stability, (New)
radioactive decay, reactions. Current topics in
nuclear and particle physics research at MIT. Prereq.: 8.04, 8.044
J. L. Matthews U (IAP)
1-3-2
8.282 Introduction to Astrophysics and Instruments and data analysis methods used
Astronomy in radio astronomy: including antennas,
receivers, calibration, signal processing, and
Prereq.: 8.01
image processing. Emphasis on relating radio
U (Spring) measurements to the study of astrophysical
3-0-6 REST phenomena. Includes a project to be carried
Quantitative introduction to physics of the out with Haystack Observatory's 37-meter
galaxy and the universe, as determined from a radio telescope.
variety of astronomical observations and from J. N. Hewitt, Haystack Observatory staff
cosmic ray and neutrino experiments. Topics:
the sun and "normal" stars, supernovae, pul- 8.292J Fluid Physics
sars, globular clusters, compact objects (white
dwarfs, neutron stars, black holes), optical and (Same subject as 12.330J)
X-ray stellar binary systems, interstellar Prereq.: 8.044 or 5.60 or permission of instrucmedium and star formation, galaxies, quasars, tor
and cosmology. Prior knowledge of astronomy U (Spring)
not necessary. Not usable as a restricted elec- 3-0-9
tive by physics majors. A physics-based introduction to the properties
B. F Burke of fluids and fluid systems, with examples
drawn from a broad range of sciences. Defini-
8.284 Modern Astrophysics tions of fluids and the notion of continuum.
Equations of state and continuity; conservation
Prereq.: 8.04, 8.05 of momentum; the stress tensor; ideal fluids
U (Fall)
3-0-9 and Euler's equation; viscosity and NavierStokes equation. Hydrostatics and magApplications of physics (Newtonian, statistical, netohydrodynamics. Energy considerations,
and quantum mechanics) to fundamental fluid thermodynamics, and isentropic flow.
processes that occur in celestial objects. In- Compressible vs incompressible and rotational
cludes main-sequence stars, collapsed stars vs irrotational flow; Bernoulli's theorem; steady
(white dwarfs, neutron stars, and black holes), flow and streamlines. Circulation and vorticity.
pulsars, supernovae, the interstellar medium, Thomson's theorem. Boundary layers. Fluid
galaxies, and as time permits, active galaxies, waves and instabilities. See description under
quasars, and cosmology. Observational data subject 12.330J.
discussed. No prior knowledge of astronomy is K. Emanuel, P. Joss
required.
P. Schechter 8.299 Physics Teaching
Prereq.: 8.286 The Early Universe
Prereq.: 18.03, 8.02
Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: U (Spring)
3-0-9 REST
Introduction to modern cosmology. First half
deals with the development of the big-bang
theory from 1915 to 1980, and latter half with
recent impact of particle theory. Topics: special relativity and the Doppler effect, Newtonian cosmological models, introduction to
non-Euclidean spaces, thermal radiation and
early history of the universe, big-bang
nucleosynthesis, introduction to grand unified
theories and other recent developments in particle theory, baryogenesis, the inflationary
universe model, and the evolution of galactic
structure.
A. H. Guth
-
U (Fall, Spring)
Units arranged [P/D/F
Can be repeated for credit
For qualified undergraduate students interested in gaining some experience in teaching.
Laboratory, tutorial, or classroom teaching
under the supervision of a faculty member. Students selected by interview.
Information: J. W. Belcher.
8.ThU Undergraduate Physics Thesis
Prereq.: -
Graduate Subjects
General and Mathematical
Physics
8.311 Electromagnetic Theory
Prereq.: 8.07
G (Fall)
4-0-8 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Basic principles of electromagnetism: experimental basis, electrostatics, magnetic
fields of steady currents, motional e.m.f. and
electromagnetic induction, Maxwell's equations, propagation and radiation of electromagnetic waves, electric and magnetic properties
of matter, conservation laws. This is a
graduate level subject which uses appropriate
mathematics but whose emphasis is on physical phenomena and principles.
L. Levitov
8.312 Electromagnetic Theory
Prereq.: 8.311
G (Spring)
4-0-8 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Continuation of 8.311 followed by an introduction to classical field theory. Special relativity
Li6nard-Wiechert potentials, special topics
(may include bremsstrahlung, virtual photons,
Cerenkov radiation, multipole radiation, etc.).
Lagrangian and Hamiltonian field theory: a
choice among the electromagnetic field, the
gravitational field (general relativity), nonAbelian gauge fields, and the Dirac electron
field.
L. Levitov
8.321 Quantum Theory I
Prereq.: 8.05, 8.21
G (Fall)
4-0-8 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
8.322 Quantum Theory 1I
Prereq.: 8.07, 8.321
G (Spring)
4-0-8 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
A two-semester subject on quantum theory,
stressing principles: uncertainty relation, observables, eigenstates, eigenvalues, probabilities of the results of measurement,
transformation theory, equations of motion,
constants of motion. Symmetry in quantum
mechanics, representations of symmetry
groups. Variational and perturbation approximations. Systems of identical particles
and applications. Time-dependent perturbation
theory. Scattering theory: phase shifts, Born
approximation. The quantum theory of radiation. Second quantization and many-body
theory. Relativistic quantum mechanics of one
electron.
U (Fall, Spring, Summer) J. Negele
Units arranged
Can be repeated for credit
Program of undergraduate research, leading
to the writing of an S.B. thesis; to be arranged
by the student under approved supervision.
J. L. Matthews
374 Chapter Vill
