School of Architecture and Planning
Tutorials, Fieldwork,
and Internships
11.UR Undergraduate Research
Prereq.: -
U (Fall, Spring)
Units arranged [P/D/F]
Can be repeated for credit
11.URG Undergraduate Research
Prereq.. -
U (Fall, Spring)
Units arranged
Can be repeated for credit
Undergraduate research opportunities in
Urban Studies and Planning. For further information, consult the Departmental Coordinators.
J. Ferreira, Jr.
11.191,11.192 Supervised Readings In
Urban Studies
Prereq.: -
U (Fall, Spring)
3-0-6
Can be repeated for credit
Reading and discussion of special topics in
urban studies. By arrangement with individual
members of the staff.
J. P. de Monchaux
11.194,11.195 Special Topics in Urban
Studies and
Planning
Prereq.: -
U (Fall, Spring, Summer)
Units arranged
Can be repeated for credit
Small-group study of special topics under staff
supervision. For undergraduates wishing to
pursue further study or fieldwork in specialized
areas of urban studies or city and regional
planning not covered in regular subjects of instruction.
J. P. de Monchaux
11.196 Urban Fieldwork and Internships
Prereq.: -
U (Fall, Spring)
Units arranged [P/D/F]
Can be repeated for credit
Practical application of city and regional planning techniques to towns, cities, and regions,
including problems of replanning, redevelop- ment, and renewal of existing communities. Includes internships, under staff supervision, in
municipal and state agencies and departments
under staff supervision.
J. P. de Monchaux
11.197, 11.198, 11.199 Special Studies in
Urban Studies and Planning
Prereq.: -
Graduate Subjects
Master's Core Subjects
11.200 Planning and Institutional Processes
(Revised Units)
Prereq.: Permission of instructor
G (Fall)
3-0-9
Basic paradigms and theories of planning practice. Evaluates historical and current developments in planning, with special emphasis on
the institutional setting of planning in American
society. Lectures, case studies, and comparative analyses explore the changing roles of the
planner and the key dilemmas in planning practice. Focuses on strategies of institutional intervention and implementation. Restricted to
first-year M.C.P. students.
G. Hack, L. E. Susskind
11.205 Planning and Institutional
Processes in Developing Countries
(Revised Units)
Prereq.:
U (IAP)
Units arranged
Can be repeated for credit
Planned subjects of instruction for use during
IAP only. 11.197 is taught P/D/F.
J. P. de Monchaux
-
11.210 Political Economy for Planners I
Prereq.: Permission of instructor
G (Fall)
4-2-6
Introduces economic analysis for planners emphasizing problems which are encountered in
professional education. Topics include basic
elements of economic theory, multiple perspectives on the labor market, environmental issues, productivity growth and restructuring,
income inequality, health care, and the new
location theory. Restricted to first-year M.C.P.
students.
F. Levy
11.220 Quantitative Reasoning and
Statistical Methods for Planning I
Prereq.: Permission of instructor
G (Spring)
4-2-6
Develops logical, empirically based arguments
using statistical techniques and analytic
methods. Covers elementary statistics, probability, and other types of quantitative reasoning useful for description; estimation,
comparison, and explanation. Emphasizes the
use and limitations of analytical techniques in
planning practice. Restricted to first-year
G (Fall) M.C.P. students.
3-0-9 J. M. Schuster
The planning process in developing countries.
Interaction between planners and institutions
at both national and local levels. Overview of
theories of state, organizational arrangements,
implementation mechanisms, and planning Department-wide Subjects
styles. Case studies of planning: decentralization, provision of low-cost housing, and newtown development. Analyzes various roles
planners play in different institutional contexts. Methods
Professional ethics and values amidst conflicting demands. Restricted to first-year M.C.P. 11.221 Quantitative Reasoning and
and SPURS students. Statistical Methods for Planning I
B. Sanyal Prereq.: 11.220
Acad Year 1996-97: G (Spring)
11.207 Introduction to Computers in Public
Acad Year 1997-98: Not offered
Management 1
4-2-6
(11.227)
Using the analytical skills developed in 11.220,
Prereq.: 11.220
this subject extends the statistical techniques
G (Fall)
to address topics in modeling and forecasting.
1-1-1
Emphasizes the use and limitation of modeling
11.208 Introduction to Computers in Public in planning practice. Covers techniques of mulManagement 11 tiple regression and time series analysis. Uses
data sets from actual planning applications for (11.228)
examples and problem sets.
Prereq.: 11.227 0. Shen
G (IAP)
1-1-1
Basic understanding of microcomputer uses in
planning and public management. Develop
problem-solving skills using computer-based
tools for "what-if" analyses. Emphasis on constructing, running, and interpreting various
analytic models and spatial analyses using
spreadsheets, database management, and
mapping. Introductions to geographic information systems and structured programming.
J. Ferreira, Jr., Q. Shen
396 Chapter Vill
