Department of Urban Studies and Planning Course 11
11.023 Bridging Cultural and Racial
Differences
Prereq.: -
Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: U (Fall)
4-0-5
Explores cultural and racial stereotypes to increase understanding and appreciation of differences. Emphasis on developing techniques
for conflict resolution in a more diversified
America in the next century. Attention to
economic status, residential segregation,
education, political participation, and crime
through current readings, films/videos, and
guest speakers.
C. G. Williams
11.024 Great Cities
Prereq.: -
U (Spring)
3-0-6
Seminar that explores the attributes of cities
that are described by a variety of sources, including members of the class, as "great cities."
Class concerns a variety of criteria that have
been, or might be, used to ascribe greatness
to cities, such as attractiveness, quality of life,
and richness of opportunity, and exmaines the
consistency and/or contradictory evidence in
judgments about cities.
J. P. de Monchaux
11.026J Downtown
(New)
(Subject meets with 21 H.234J, 11.339)
Prereq.: -
11.104 Infrastructure in Developing
Countries
(Subject meets with 11.469J, 1.254J)
Prereq.:
U (Spring)
2-0-7 HASS
Seminar on downtown in US cities from the
late nineteenth century to the late twentieth.
Emphasis on downtown as an idea, place, and
cluster of interests, on the changing character
of downtown, and on recent efforts to rebuild
it. Subjects considered include subways,
skyscrapers, highways, urban renewal, and
retail centers. Focus on readings, discussions,
and individual research projects. Meets with
graduate subject 11.339, but assignments differ.
R. M. Fogelson, B. J. Frieden
Specialized Subjects
11.102J Theories of Economic Development
(Same subject as 14.75J)
Prereq.: 14.01, 14.02
U (Fall)
3-0-9 HASS
See description under subject 14.75J.
A. Banerlee
-
U (Fall)
3-0-9
Meets with graduate subject 11.469J, but assignments differ. See description under subject
11.469J.
R. A. Gakenheimer
11.122 Environmental Policy and Regulation
Prereq.: -
U (Spring)
3-0-9 HASS
Evaluates the strengths and weaknesses of different ways in which the government can act
to protect the environment: pollution standards, marketable rights, taxes, and citizen empowerment. Emphasis on economic analysis,
but also compares other policy perspectives including law and politics.
Consult Department Headquarters.
11.123 Big Plans
Prereq.: -
U (Fall)
2-0-7 HASS
Explores social, technological, political,
economic, and cultural implications of "Big
Plans" - those that are vast in scale (whether
financially, geographically, or across functional
areas). Examples include the Boston Harbor
Cleanup, Washington as a national capital,
and housing plans in developing countries.
J. P. de Monchaux
11.124 Introduction to Teaching and
Learning
Prereq.: -
11.125 Observation and Analysis of
Classroom Settings
Prereq.: 11.124 or permission of instructor
U (Spring)
3-6-3 HASS
Five hours of observation in math and science
classrooms grades 6-12. Includes interpretation development, observation skills, log-keeping, analysis and critiques of student
observations. High school teachers consult on
classroom management, discipline, learning
styles, administration, diverse communities.
Subject instructors, MIT Teaching Fellows, and
high school teachers meet with students to critique logs and help design curriculum units for
classroom testing. Satisfies 75 hours of supervised classroom observation required for
Mass. teacher's certification.
J. Bamberger, S. Carey
11.165 Courts and American Society
Prereq.:
U (Fall)
3-6-3 HASS
Emphasis on teaching and learning in urban
settings. Concentrates on understanding the
child as knowledge constructor and on different approaches to curriculum design and assessment. Students work through constructive
learning projects, analyze videotapes of precollege students engaged in similar projects,
and compare their own theories and problemsolving strategies with those of younger students. Participants analyze videotapes of
master math/science teachers working in the
classroom with students. Each student is
paired with an experienced middle- or highschool teacher/mentor who attends the subject. Recommended for students considering
careers in teaching.
J. Bamberger, S. Carey
-
Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: U (Spring)
3-0-9 HASS-D, Category 4
Analyzes the historical evolution of the courts
in American society. Topics covered include
the debate over judicial activism, the role of
the courts as agents of social change, and the
American proclivity for litigation to resolve both
public and private disputes. Controversies examined include the abortion decisions, the
school desegregation cases, and the evolution
of the insanity defense.
Consult Department Headquarters.
Laboratories
11.188 Urban Planning and Social Science
Laboratory
Prereq.: Permission of instructor
U (Spring)
3-6-3 Institute LAB
Introduces social science research methods
and empirical analysis experience in a
"workshop" setting involving urban planning
problems. Explores various qualitative and
quantitative methods - surveys, case studies,
comparative research, statistical and spatial
analysis. Emphasizes development of a research project related to a real-world planning
problem, selection of appropriate methods,
use of primary and secondary data, and computer-based modeling and spatial analysis. Includes experience in interviewing and
conducting research work in the field.
J. Ferreira, Jr., 0. Shen
Descriptions of Subjects 395
