Biology
For degree requirements, see listing in
Chapter ViI under the School of Science.
7.UR Undergraduate Research
Prereq.: -
U (Fall, Spring)
Units arranged [P/D/F]
Can be repeated for credit
7.URG Undergraduate Research
Prereq.: -
U (Fall, Spring)
Units arranged
Can be repeated for credit
Undergraduate research opportunities in the
Department of Biology. For further information,
consult the Departmental Coordinator: Gene
Brown. Permission of department required.
7.012, 7.013, 7.014 Introductory Biology
Prereq.: -
7.02 Introduction to Experimental Biology 7.06 Cell Biology
Prereq.: 7.012 or 7.013 or 7.014 Prereq.: 7.05
U (Fall, Spring) U (Fall)
2-8-5 Institute LAB 3-0-9
Application of experimental techniques in Biology of cells of higher organisms: structure,
biochemistry, microbiology, and cell biology. function, and biosynthesis of cellular
Emphasizes integrating factual knowledge with membranes and organelles; cell growth and
understanding the design of experiments and oncogenic transformation; transport, receptors
data analysis to prepare the students for re- and cell signaling; the cytoskeleton, the exsearch projects. Concurrent registration with tracellular matrix, and cell movements;
7.03 or 7.05 is recommended. Restricted to up- chromatin structure and RNA synthesis.
perclassmen. 12 units may be applied to the R. A. Young, P. Sorger
General Institute Laboratory Requirement.
Fall Term: J. King, A. Rich 7.08 Molecular Biology
Spring Term: J. Liu, M. Fox
Prereq.: 7.03; 7.05
U (Spring)
7.03 Genetics 4-0-8
Prereq.: 7.012 or 7.013 or 7.014
Detailed analysis of the biochemical
U (Fall, Spring) U (Fall) mechanisms that control the maintenance, ex-
5-0-7 BIOLOGY 4-0-8 REST
pression, and evolution of prokaryotic and
All three subjects cover the same core The principles of genetics with application to eukaryotic genomes. Topics covered in lecture
material, which includes the fundamental prin- the study of biological function at the level of and readings of relevant literature include:
ciples of biochemistry, genetics, molecular biol- molecules, cells, and multicellular organisms. gene regulation, DNA replication, genetic
ogy, and cell biology. In addition, each version Structure and function of genes and recombination, and translation.
of the subject has its own distinctive material, chromosomes. Biological variation resulting S. Bell, T. Baker
described below. The core material focuses on from recombination, mutation, and selection.
function at a molecular level: the structure and Use of genetic methods to analyze protein 7.11 Biology Teaching
regulation of genes, and the structure and syn- function, gene regulation, development, and inPrereq.: thesis of proteins; how these molecules are in- herited disease.
tegrated into cells; and how cells are C. Kaiser, L. Guarente
integrated into cells; and how cells are integrated into multicellular systems and or- 7.05 General Biochemistry
ganisms.
Prereq.: 5.12; 7.012 or 7.013 or 7.014 or perCoordinators: U. Ra]Bhandary, P. Matsudaira
Instructors: B. White, S. Verghis mission of instructor
U (Spring)
Fall Term: 7.012. Exploration into areas of
5-0-7 REST
current research in cell biology, immunology,
neurobiology, developmental biology, and Credit cannot also be received for 5.07
evolution. Spring Term: 7.013. Application of Contributions of biochemistry toward an underthe fundamental principles toward an under- standing of the structure and functioning of orstanding of cells, human genetics and dis- ganisms, tissues, and cells. Chemistry and
eases, infectious agents, cancer, the immune functions of constituents of cells and tissues
system, and evolution. Spring Term: 7.014. Ap- and the chemical and physical-chemical basis
plication of the fundamental principles toward for the structures of nucleic acids, proteins,
an understanding of microorganisms as and carbohydrates. General metabolism of cargeochemical agents responsible for the evolu- bohydrates, fats, and nitrogen-containing
tion and renewal of the biosphere and of their materials such as amino acids, proteins, and
role in human health and disease. related compounds.
Fall Term: 7.012: R. Weinberg, H. Lodish G. M. Brown, P. Schimmel
Spring Term: 7.013: D. Page, U. RajBhandary
Term 2: 7.014: S. Chisholm, G. Walker
-
Department of Biology Course 7
Course 7
U (Fall, Spring)
Units arranged
For qualified undergraduate students interested in gaining some experience in teaching.
Laboratory, tutorial, or classroom teaching
under the supervision of a faculty member. Students selected by interview.
Consult Biology Student Office.
7.13 Experimental Microbial Genetics
Prereq.: 7.02, 7.03, 7.05
Acad Year 1996-97: U (Fall)
Acad Year 1997-98: Not offered
2-16-6
Laboratory project in microbiology and
genetics to address fundamental questions of
gene organization, regulation, and expression
using Corynebacterium glutamicum. Use of advanced genetic and rDNA technology approaches.
A. J. Sinskey
Descriptions of Subjects 365
