Department of Urban Studies and Planning Course 11
11.333J Urban Design Seminar
(New)
(Same subject as 4.244J)
Prereq.: -
G (Spring)
2-0-7
Seminar on the basic theories of urban design.
Includes morphological, structural, and procedural approaches. Case studies of important
urban design efforts. Required for Urban
Design certificate students.
G. Hack
11.335J Cities of Tomorrow
(Same subject as 4.245J)
Prereq.: Permission of instructor
G (Fall)
3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Research seminar on the future of urban
design, to focus on developing a realistic
projection of the organization, function, and
form of cities, based on an analysis of contemporary trends. Review of historical efforts in
the tradition of predicting urban change.
Analysis of contemporary urban design
projects and proposals. Supplemented by readings and speakers in parallel fields likely to
have impact on urban form, including information processing, communications, entertainment.
D. Frenchman
11.337J Environmental Design Policy and
Action
(Same subject as 4.247J)
Prereq.: -
G (Spring)
3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Seminar on ways that governments influence
the quality of environmental design. Focuses
on the success and failure of methods for
achieving urban design objectives through
various public policy mechanisms: incentives,
standards and regulations, owning and operating, creation and enforcement of legal rights,
and information-based strategies. Students
complete a research project.
J. P. de Monchaux
11.339 Downtown
(New)
(Subject meets with 21 H.234J, 11.026J)
Prereq.: -
11.340J Legal Issues in the Development
Process
(Same subject as 15.658J)
Prereq.: Permission of instructor
G (Fall)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Reviews the legal issues that arise in the
course of acquiring, managing, and developing
real estate. Topics covered include purchase
and sale agreements, organization of the
ownership entity, financing, contracting,
federal income taxation of real estate, fiduciary
relationships, leasing, and workouts.
L. Bacow
Environmental Policy and Planning
11.360 Community Growth and Land Use
Planning
Prereq.: 11.200
G (Fall)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Seminar and fieldwork on strategies of planning and control for growth and land use, chiefly at the municipal level. Growth and its local
consequences; land use planning approaches;
implementation tools including innovative
zoning, subdivision controls, infrastructure systems, and fiscal techniques. Projects arranged
with small teams serving municipal clients.
T. S. Szold
11.361 Environmental Policy and Regulation
Prereq.:
G (Spring)
2-0-7
Seminar on downtown in US cities from the
late nineteenth century to the late twentieth.
Emphasis on downtown as an idea, place, and
cluster of interests, on the changing character
of downtown, and on recent efforts to rebuild
it. Topics considered include subways,
skyscrapers, highways, urban renewal, and
retail centers. Focus on readings, discussions,
and individual research projects. Meets with
undergraduate subject 11.026J, but assignments differ.
R. M. Fogelson, B. J. Frieden
-
11.363J Chemicals in the Environment:
Policy and Management
(Same subject as TPP.54J)
Prereq.:
G (Fall)
3-0-9
Examines the role of government in environmental protection. Economic analysis is emphasized, but other policy frames are
considered. Traces evolution of US environmental policy from command/control, citizen
empowerment, to current interest in market
manipulation.
P. Levy
11.362 Environmental Management
Prereq.: 11.361
G (Spring)
3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Analyzes national, state, and regional efforts
to plan for the allocation and use of environmental resources. Discussions focus on
strengths and weaknesses of traditional planning and regulatory mechanisms. Political
obstacles to plan implementation and
strategies for citizens' participation in environmental policy making receive special attention.
L. E. Susskind
-
G (Spring)
3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Examines public policy for managing hazardous substances, including old waste cleanup,
disposal of new wastes, and current use of
hazardous substances. Analyzes use and
limits of risk assessment in and roles of different government and non-governmental actors in policy formulation and implementation.
Examines policy mechanisms for achieving environmental goals. Focuses on how new approaches can overcome failures of past efforts
to reduce toxics in the environment, with emphasis on pollution prevention.
V. Norberg-Bohm
11.364 International Environmental
Negotiation
Prereq.: 11.361, 11.362, 11.255
G (Fall)
3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
This is the fourth subject in the Environmental
Policy and Planning sequence. Seminar looks
at problems of managing common resources,
difficulties of achieving transboundary pollution
control, and the dilemmas of regional harmonization of environmental protection standards (particularly in Europe). At the core of
these problems are issues of how best to structure international negotiations. Focuses especially on problems of representation voting,
linkage, and enforcement.
L. E. Susskind
11.365J Environmental Management of the
Coast
(Same subject as 13.98J)
Prereq.: Permission of instructor
G (Spring)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
See description under subject 13.98J.
J. T. Kildow
11.366 Planning for Sustainable
Development
(Revised Content)
Prereq.: -
G (Fall)
3-0-6
Explores policy and planning for sustainable
development. Critically examines concept of
sustainability from social, economic, and
biogeophysical perspectives. Explores pathways to sustainability through debates on
limits to growth; poverty and environmental
degradation; technology and financial transfers; and international and intergenerational
equity. Applies these analytical and policy
frameworks to case-studies on resource
management (e.g., soil erosion, water,
fisheries) and industrialization (e.g., on energy,
hazardous wastes).
V. Norberg-Bohm, 0. Razzaz
Descriptions of Subjects 399
