School of Engineering
13.61 Project Management 13.661 Economics of Marine Transportation 13.690-699 Special Problems in Ocean
Prereq.: Permission of instructor and Environment Engineering
G (Fall) Prereq.: 14.01 or permission of instructor Prereq.:
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit G (Fall)
2-0-4 H-LEVEL Grad Credit Review of project and development
economics. Project identification and demand Studies the economics of the principal markets
forecast techniques. Study of project design related to marine transportation, environment,
and planning methods such as network plan- and natural resources. Structures of the
ning techniques, technological forecasting and markets and industries involved; competition;
evaluation methods, capital budgeting and impacts of policies and regulations. Analysis of
project control, and scheduling techniques. the interrelationships among economic inTechnical, operational, economic, and financial frastructures, technologies, and national
project analyses reviewed. Methods for selec- policies. Introduces new concepts of national
tion from among project alternatives dis- income accounts, sustainability, and intercussed. Study of procurement or contracting generational equity and their relationship to
process. Approaches to project supervision, current economic practice. Meets first half of
test, and acceptance. term.
E. G. Frankel J. T. Kildow, H. S. Marcus
13.615J Project Control 13.665J Logistical and Transportation
(New) Planning Methods
(Same subject as 1.432J) (Same subject as 1.203J, 6.281J, 11.526J,
Prereq.: Permission of instructor 15.073J, 16.76J)
G (Fall) Prereq.: 6.431, 15.075
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit G (Fall)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
See description under subject 1.432J.
F. Pelia-Mora, H. S. Marcus See description under subject 1.203J.
A. /. Barnett, R. C. Larson, A. R. Odoni
13.62 Engineering Systems Analysis
13.68 Management of Marine Systems
Prereq.: Permission of instructor
G (Fall) Prereq.: Permission of instructor
3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit G (Fall)
2-0-4 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Engineering School-Wide Elective Subject.
Description given at end of this chapter in Analyzes current technological, market, and
SWE section on page 562. regulatory trends in various segments of the
R. de Neufville, J. P. Clark, F. Field marine industry and government development
programs such as liner trades, vessel charter-
13.621 Engineering Risk-Benefit ing, shipbuilding, defense systems, and coasAnalysis tal facilities; description of resources and
constraints involved; impact of trends on
Prereq.: 18.02 management decisions; analysis of problems
G (Spring) actually existing in the field. Meets during
3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit second half of term.
Engineering School-Wide Elective Subject. H. S. Marcus
Description given at end of this chapter in
SWE section on page 562. 13.685J Manufacturing/Technology
G. Apostolakis, A. W. Drake, A. R. Odoni Interface
(Same subject as 15.365J)
13.64 Projects in Ocean Systems Prereq.: Permission of instructor
Management G (Spring)
Prereq.: Permission of instructor 3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
G (Spring) See description under subject 15.365J.
Units arranged H-LEVEL Grad Credit J. M. Utterback
An applied problem-solving subject where students work in multidisciplinary teams to solve 13.69 International Shipping
current ocean systems problems. Designed to
Prereq.: 13.68 train students how to think about large marine
G (Spring) systems, identify problems, formulate and
3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit carry out research plans, perform rigorous
analyses, and seek alternative solutions. Com- Explores internal operating, financial, and
bines analytical skills and knowledge in marine marketing issues as well as external market
management, ocean engineering tech- and technological factors that define the internologies, and marine sciences. Projects national shipping environment. Includes effect
change yearly, and include topics such as of world energy prices and changing trade patocean transport systems, oil and other marine terns upon demand for shipping; evaluation of
pollution, dredging and port systems, waste- shipping capacity requirements in terms of
water management, and ocean resources capital needs; new ship and terminal techmanagement. Primarily for students in Ocean nologies; and effect of changing international
Systems Management and Marine Environ- relationships. Other students admitted by permental Systems Programs; others admitted by mission of the instructor.
permission of instructor. H. S. Marcus
H. S. Marcus, J. T. Kildow, J. D. Nyhart
-
U (Fall, IAP, Spring, Summer)
Units arranged [P/D/F
Can be repeated for credit
13.700-13.709 Special Problems in Ocean
Engineering
Prereq.: -
U (Fall, IAP, Spring, Summer)
Units arranged
Can be repeated for credit
Special reading, study, design, and/or investigation under supervision of a qualified member of the staff. Topics in ocean engineering,
naval architecture, or marine engineering individually arranged to suit interests of the student. Consult Department Student
Administration Office for subject number that
will be assigned in accordance with the technical area of the topic selected.
D. K.-P. Yue
13.710-13.719 Special Problems in Ocean
Engineering
Prereq.: -
G (Fall, IAP, Spring, Summer)
Units arranged H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit
Special reading, study, design. and/or investigation under supervision of a member of the
staff. Topics in ocean engineering, naval architecture, or marine engineering individually
arranged to suit interests of the student. Consult Department Student Administration Office
for subject number that will be assigned by the
Department in accordance with the technical
area of the topic selected.
A. D. Carmichael
13.720-729 Special Problems in Ocean
Engineering
Prereq.: Permission of instructor
G (Fall, lAP, Spring, Summer)
Units arranged [P/D/F] H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit
13.730-13.739 Seminar in Ocean
Engineering
Prereq.: Permission of instructor
G (Fall, Spring)
Units arranged
Can be repeated for credit
Weekly lectures on new topics in ocean engineering by members of the MIT staff. Consult Department Student Administration Office
for subject number assigned in accordance
with the technical area of the topic selected.
Consult Department Headquarters.
424 Chapter Vill
