School of Engineering
13.871 Wave Scattering by Rough Surfaces 13.951 Transport, Fate, and Effects of
and Randomly Inhomogenous Media Ocean Pollutants
Prereq.: Permission of instructor Prereq.: 13.012 or equivalent
Acad Year 1996-97: G (Spring) G (Fall)
Acad Year 1997-98: Not offered 3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Provides the background for quantitatively
An advanced-level subject designed to give predicting and estimating the distribution of polthe student working knowledge of current tech- lution, its by-products, and some of its effects
niques in scattering theory as applied to rough on marine ecosystems, starting with informasurfaces and randomly inhomogenous media. tion about the pollution source. Topics include:
Major application of theory presented is to equations of motion for ocean flows, ocean curocean acoustics, but can be used in other rents, molecular and turbulent diffusion, fluid
acoustic and electromagnetic applications. In- mechanical transport models, seawater propercludes basics of scattering theory, volume scat- ties and chemistry, important chemicals in the
tering by discrete scatters (aerosols), ocean, sediment-chemical interactions, chemiscattering by rough surfaces, satellite remote cal-biological interactions, ocean contaminasensing using rough-surface scattering, and tions and their biological consequences.
acoustic scattering from ocean internal waves. J. H. Milgram; Woods Hole Staff
(Woods Hole Staff): J. F. Lynch, D. J. Tang,
T. Stanton 13.98J Environmental Management of the
Coast
13.92 Marine Policy
(Same subject as 11.365J)
Prereq.: Permission of instructor Prereq.: Permission of instructor
G (Fall) G (Spring)
3-0-3 H-LEVEL Grad Credit 3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Features major ocean uses and their as- Methods and concepts introduced through
sociated national and international policy is- case studies of management options for meetsues through the vehicles of (a) policy analysis ing coastal environmental challenges. Includes
and (b) case studies demonstrating relation- background in physical and ecological coastal
ships among ocean uses and technologies, processes to provide foundation for underand their relationship to politics and economic standing natural process change and the iminfrastructure. Cases focus on living and non- plications of human interventions which stretch
living resource management problems, and or alter natural limitations. Cases focus on inpollution and conservation issues of environ- stitutional and regulatory frameworks for three
mental management. Taught first half of term environmental themes: 1) impacts of global
in coordination with 13.94. climate change, 2) coastal pollution and
J. T. Kildow biodiversity, 3) conflicting uses.
J. T. Kildow
13.94 Law for Ocean Systems
13.990J Oceanographic Systems I Prereq.: Permission of instructor
G (Fall) (Same subject as 1.697J)
3-0-3 H-LEVEL Grad Credit Prereq.:
Legal framework for managing ocean resources and systems, combining public law of the
sea, admiralty, and the US regulatory law.
OCS, tanker, shipping, and environmental
regimes. Law for new ocean technologies.
Questions of jurisdiction and implementation
arising from new economic zones or unilateral
extensions. Principles governing applicability
of civil and criminal law offshore. Focus on
relationship of law and technology. Taught
second half of term in coordination with 13.92.
J. D. Nyhart
-
G (Summer)
2-4-6
Orientation subject for students entering the
MIT-Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
program in oceanographic engineering.
Oceanographic experiments of research interest in Cape Cod waters carried through experiment design, instrumentation design,
construction and testing, deployment, data
taking and interpretation of results. Research
teams made up of students in 13.990J and
13.991J together. Participation in summer
seminars at WHOI. Given at Woods Hole
Oceanographic Institution.
(Woods Hole Staff), J. F Lynch
13.991J Oceanographic Systems II
(Same subject as 1.698J)
Prereq.: -
13.998 Principles of Oceanographic
Instrument Systems - Sensors and
Measurements
Prereq.: 2.03J/13.013J, 18.075
Acad Year 1996-97: G (Spring)
Acad Year 1997-98: Not offered
3-3-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Introduces theoretical and practical principles
of design of oceanographic sensor systems.
Transducer characteristics for acoustic, current, temperature, pressure, electric, magnetic,
gravity, salinity, velocity, heat flow, and optical
devices. Limitations on these devices imposed
by ocean environment. Signal conditioning and
recording; noise, sensitivity, and sampling
limitations; standards. Principles of state-of-theart systems being used in physical oceanography, geophysics, submersibles, acoustics
discussed in lectures by experts in these
areas. Laboratory project required.
(Woods Hole Staff): A. Williams, J. Irish,
C. Mazel (MIT)
13.999J Special Projects in Oceanographic
Engineering
(Same subject as 1.699J)
Prereq.: Permission of instructor
G (Fall, Spring, Summer)
Units arranged H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit
Special problems in oceanographic engineering, carried out under supervision of members
of the staff of the Woods Hole Oceanographic
Institution. Given at Woods Hole
Oceanographic Institution.
(Woods Hole Staff)
13.ThG Graduate Thesis
Prereq.:
G (Summer)
2-4-6
Continuation of 13.990J during second summer term in the MIT-WHOI Joint Program in
Oceanographic Engineering. Given at Woods
Hole Oceanographic Institution.
(Woods Hole Staff)
- G (Fall, lAP, Spring, Summer)
Units arranged H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit
Program of graduate research, leading to the
writing of an S.M., Ph.D., or Sc.D. thesis; to be
arranged by the student and an appropriate
MIT faculty member. Consult Department
Headquarters.
Staff
426 Chapter Vill
