School of Architecture and Planning
International Development and Regional 11.466 Common Property Resources
Planning
Prereq.:
11.462 Housing Problems and Policies in
Developing Countries
Prereq.: 11.205 or equivalent
G (Spring)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Focuses on the particular attributes, innovations, and methods of analysis of urban land
and housing in developing and transition
countries. Includes an overview of theory on
supply and demand, tenure, standards, and
community participation, detailed review of
tools used in the field, and an examination of
case studies revealing innovations in the field.
Particular emphasis given to affordability and
accessibility by the poor. Class format combines lectures, class projects, and presentation.
0. Razzaz
11.463J Structuring Low-Income Housing
Projects in Developing Countries
(Same subject as 4.236J)
Prereq.: Permission of instructor
G (Spring)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
See description under subject 4.236J.
R. Goethert
11.464 The Informal Sector and the
Household Economy
Prereq.: 11.205
Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: G (Spring)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Examines interrelationships among low-income households, small-scale, incomegenerating activities, and the urban economy
in developing countries. Theories of employment and an analysis of "bazaar economies
looked at. Reviews policy options for enhancing the informal sector's contribution to
development. The role of women and the possibilities of nonmonetary activities explored.
B. Sanyal
11.465J Special Interest Group in Urban
Settlements: SIGUS Workshops
(Same subject as 4.23,J)
Prereq.: Permission of instructor
G (IAP, Spring)
Units arranged [P/D/F] H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit
See description under subject 4.23J.
R. Goethert, R. A. Gakenheimer, B. Sanyal
-
G (Spring)
3-0-9
Introduces students to conceptual and practical aspects of managing common resources.
Examines the management issues raised by
distinctive characteristics of various resources
(fisheries, wildlife, water resources, forests,
and land), explores the various institutional
structures and property rights assignments to
such resources, and develops the ability to assess and improve the management of such
resources.
0. Razzaz
11.467J Property Rights Under Transition
(Same subject as 4.257J, 17.550J)
Prereq.: 11.210 or permission of instructor
G (Fall)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Seminar on different economic, political, and
social perspectives of property rights and their
policy and planning implications. Each year the
theory and applications from two or more key
areas, such as land, natural resources, infrastructure, or industrial organization, are
covered.
K. R. Polenske
11.469J Infrastructure in Developing
Countries
(Subject meets with 1.254J, 11.104)
Prereq.: -
11.480 Theory and Practice of Privatization
in Emerging Economics
(New)
Prereq.: 11.205 or equivalent
G (Spring)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Explores the theoretical and practical aspects
of privatization in emerging economies (i.e.
developing countries and postcommunist nations). Analyzes why privatization became an
important policy issue starting in the 1980s;
how such programs were designed and implemented in various countries and industries, including infrastructure, manufacturing, and
financial services; and the short-term and longterm consequences for productivity growth, fiscal management, structure of business
enterprise, business-government relations,
and regulation. Also analyzes the opportunities
and risks for private investors, including multinational corporations, of participating in
privatization transactions.
A. Amsden
11.481 J Regional Economic Theories,
Accounts, and Techniques
(Same subject as 1.284J)
Prereq.: 14.03, 14.04
G (Spring)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Surveys the basic theories, accounting
frameworks, and techniques used in regional
and multiregional economic analyses. Emphasizes the aspects of each relevant to their
use in program impact and distribution studies.
G (Fall) Uses problem sets (some microcomputer-
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit based) to illustrate the different concepts.
Planning for transport, water supply, K. R. Polenske
sewerage, etc. Summarizes the technologies
but emphasizes the planning process and 11.482J Regional Socioeconomic Impact
decision points within that are important to Analyses and Modeling
planned objectives. Deals with patterns of con-
(Same subject as 1.285J)
sumption, strategies of problems analysis,
Prereq.: 11.481J or permission of instructor
technology choices, equity questions, pricing, G (Fall)
finance, building viable public-sector institu-
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
tions, privatization, relationships between technocrats and politicians, roles of interest Reviews regional economic theories and
groups. Meets with undergraduate subject models and provides students with experience
11.104, but assignments differ. in using alternative economic impact assessR. A. Gakenheimer ment models on microcomputers. First two
problem sets are oriented around infrastruc-
11.471 Political Economy of Development ture investments and environmental issues in
Projects: Targeting the Poor Massachusetts. Students may select their own
set of data and region for the third problem set.
Prereq.: 11.210 or equivalent
K. R. Polenske
G (Spring)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
11.484 Project Evaluation and Planning in
Covers public-sector policies, programs, and Developing Countries
projects that target the poor in developing
Prereq.: 11.205
countries and involve small enterprises, small
G (Spring)
farmers, cooperatives, nongovernment or-
3-0-9
ganizations, employment-beating programs,
and social investment funds. Links these Examines techniques and procedures relevant
programs to the literature on poverty, for project planning and implementation in
economic development, and the reform of developing countries, including project idengovernment. Discusses types of projects, tification, feasibility analysis, design and imtasks, and environments that are conducive to plementation monitoring. Considers how to
equitable outcome. evaluate economic and distributive effects of
J. Tendler completed or ongoing development projects.
Specific attention given to how institutional setting and other practical influences affect the
use of conventional analytical tools.
P. Smoke
402 Chapter Vill
