School of Science
Graduate Subjects 12.453 Crosby Lectures in Geology 12.459 Sedimentary and Surficial Geology
Investigations
Prereq.: Permission of instructor
(Revised Content)
12.ThG Graduate Thesis G (Fall, Spring)
3-0-6 [P/D/F] H-LEVEL Grad Credit (Subject meets with 12.159)
Prereq.: Permission of instructor Can be repeated for credit Prereq.: Permission of instructor
G (Fall, Spring, Summer) G (Spring)
A series of presentations on an advanced
Units arranged H-LEVEL Grad Credit 3-6-3 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit t li o a p m ic O in t is th C e r f o ie s l b d y o l f e c g t e u o re lo r. g y T h b e y t C he ro s v b is y it in le g c - Wil- Can be repeated for credit
Program of graduate research, leading to the tureship is awarded to a distinguished In-depth examination of modern and ancient
writing of an S.M., Ph.D., or Sc.D. thesis; to be international scientist each year to introduce depositional systems, Earth-surface landforms,
arranged by the student and an appropriate new scientific perspectives to the MIT com- and surficial processes, utilizing concepts of
MIT faculty member. munity. Subject content and structure vary process sedimentology and geomorphology,
Consult Department Headquarters. from year to year. sequence stratigraphy, and sedimentary basin
Consult Department Headquarters for addition- analysis.
al information. J. P. Grotzinger, J. B. Southard, K. X. Whipple
12.455 Megascopic Strain Analysis in 12.460-12.461 Special Problems in
Geology and GeoChemistry Orogenic Belts Geology-Geochemistry
Prereq.: 12.113 Prereq.: Permission of instructor
12.450 Seminar in Geology and Acad Year 1996-97: G (Fall) G (Fall, Spring, Summer)
Geochemistry Acad Year 1997-98: Not offered Units arranged [P/D/F] H-LEVEL Grad Credit
3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit Can be repeated for credit
Prereq.: Permission of instructor
Introduction to modern techniques used to es- For graduate students desiring to perform speAcad Year 1996-97: G (Spring)
timate the magnitude of strain in orogenic cial investigations, special laboratory work, or
Acad Year 1997-98: Not offered
belts. Emphasis on megascopic strain special fieldwork in geology, petrology, mineral-
2-0-4 [P/D/F] H-LEVEL Grad Credit
analysis. Includes 1) methods of determining ogy or geochemistry. 12.460 is letter-graded.
Can be repeated for credit
sense of shear in various structural settings; 2) Geology and Geochemistry Staff
Seminar on topics of current interest in geol- the construction of 2D-balanced structural secogy and geochemistry. Required background tions; 3) the construction of 3D structural sec- 12.463 Surface Processes and Landscape
preparation for students taking pre-doctoral tions; and 4) graphical reconstruction of 2D Evolution
general examinations in these subjects. and 3D sections to pre-deformational con- (New)
T. L. Grove figurations.
K. V. Hodges (Subject meets with 12.163)
Prereq.: 8.01; 18.03
12.451 Seminar in Regional Tectonics
G (Fall)
12.456 Seminar in Rock Mechanics
Prereq.: Permission of instructor 3-3-6
G (Fall, Spring) Prereq.: Permission of instructor
Examines the interaction of climate, tectonics,
3-0-6 [P/D/F] H-LEVEL Grad Credit G (Fall, Spring)
and surface processes in the sculpting of the
Can be repeated for credit 2-0-4 [P/D/F] H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Earth's surface. Quantitative introduction to
Can be repeated for credit
Applies techniques of tectonic synthesis to mechanics of fluvial, hillslope, and glacial
study the roles of particular orogenic belts in Discussion of current research or advanced processes. Essentials of weathering, soil forglobal plate tectonics. Treats different applica- topics in continental tectonics, rock mechanics, mation, runoff, erosion, slope stability, seditions in different terms, so that the subject may or experimental structural geology. ment transport, river morphology, glacial
be taken repeatedly to learn the range of B. Evans erosion, and volcanism. System responses to
orogenic responses to temporal and spatial climatic and tectonic forcings, including: glaciavariations of activity at plate boundaries. 12.457 Sedimentary Basins tion, sea level change, uplift, subsidence, and
B. C. Burchfiel, J. P. Grotzinger, K. V. Hodges, post-glacial isostatic rebound. Additional inL. H. Royden Prereq.: 18.03, 12.113 struction in: computer modeling in the study of
Acad Year 1996-97: G (Spring) surface processes, image analysis, and GIS
12.452 Mechanics of Sedimentary Acad Year 1997-98: Not offered applications in surface hydrology and slope
Processes 3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit stability.
Formation and evolution of basin systems in K. X. Whipple
Prereq.: Permission of instructor
continental crust (including passive continental
Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
margins, foredeep acretionary basins, backAcad Year 1997-98: G (Spring)
arc type basins, intraplate rifts, etc.) are ex-
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
amined with regard to tectonic settings,
Aspects of turbulent-flow mechanics relevant structural and sedimentary features, and deep
to sediment movement. Mechanics of sedi- lithospheric processes. Case studies of
ment erosion, transportation, and deposition: several sedimentary basins of each type.
modes of particle entrainment and motion in L. H. Royden, J. P. Grotzinger
turbulent shear flows; sediment-bed configurations; erosion and deposition of cohesive sediments. Sediment gravity flows; sorting of
sediments by particle size and density. Interpretation of primary structures and textures in
modern and ancient sedimentary deposits on
the basis of sediment-transportation
mechanics.
J. B. Southard
410 Chapter Vill
