Department of Earth, Atmospheric, and Planetary Sciences Course 12
Course 12 Earth, Atmospheric, and
Planetary Sciences
For degree requirements, see listing in
Chapter VII under the School of Science.
Undergraduate Subjects
12.UR Undergraduate Research
Prereq.: -
U (Fall, IAP, Spring, Summer)
Units arranged [P/D/F]
Can be repeated for credit
12.URG Undergraduate Research
Prereq.: - U (Fall, IAP, Spring, Summer)
Units arranged
Can be repeated for credit
Undergraduate research opportunities in
Earth, Atmospheric, and Planetary Sciences.
Consult Department Headquarters.
12.IND Independent Study
Prereq.: -
U (Fall, IAP, Spring, Summer)
Units arranged
Can be repeated for credit
Independent reading, laboratory, or fieldwork
in Earth, Atmospheric, and Planetary Sciences. Requires written report. To be arranged
by student and an appropriate MIT faculty
member.
Consult Department Headquarters.
12.ThU Undergraduate Thesis
Prereq.: -
Core and General Science
Subjects
12.001 Introduction to Geology
Prereq.:
U (Fall, lAP, Spring, Summer)
Units arranged
Can be repeated for credit
Program of undergraduate research, leading
to the writing of a thesis; to be arranged by the
student and an appropriate MIT faculty member.
Consult Department Headquarters.
-
12.003 Physics of the Fluid Earth
Prereq.: 18.02, 8.01, 5.60
U (Fall)
3-1-8 REST
The laws of classical mechanics and thermodynamics are used to explore how the
U (Spring)
properties of fluids on a rotating planet, such
3-4-5 REST
as the Earth, manifest themselves in, and help
Major rock-forming minerals, rock-forming shape, the global patterns of atmospheric
processes, and rock types. Geologic structures winds, ocean currents, and the climate of the
and relationships observable in the field. Earth. Underlying mechanisms are illustrated
Geologic time scale, dating of rocks by fossil using a rotating table and through the study of
and isotopic methods. Sediment movement numerous phenomena drawn from the atmosand landform development by moving water, phere and ocean, such as hurricanes,
wind, and ice. Crustal processes and evolution thunderstorms, and ocean circulation. A
in terms of global plate tectonics. Geologic his- laboratory acquaints students with meteorologitory of the continents, with emphasis on North cal and oceanographic data.
America. Laboratories on minerals, rocks, fos- R. A. Plumb
sils, and mapping. Two nonrequired one-day
field trips. 12.004 Introduction to Planetary Science
J. B. Southard
Prereq.: 8.02, 18.03
U (Spring)
12.002 Physics and Chemistry of the Solid 3-0-9
Earth
Study of the solar system with emphasis on
Prereq.: 8.02, 18.02
physical processes. Topics include:
U (Fall)
meteorites, orbital dynamics, asteroids, impact
3-1-8 REST
craters, surfaces, atmospheres, atmospheric
Study of the Earth's structure, composition, dynamics, interiors, magnetospheres, rings,
and physical processes. Introduction to plate comets, formation of the solar system.
tectonics, earthquakes, seismic waves, and T. Dowling, M. Zuber
rheology. The Earth's gravity and magnetic
fields, heat flux, and thermal structure. Plates 12.005 Applications of Continuum
as thermal and chemical boundary layers. Mechanics to Earth, Atmospheric, and
Mantle convection, properties of the Earth's Planetary Sciences
deep interior, geomagnetism, core dynamics.
Prereq.: 8 02, 18 02, 18.03
Employs classical mechanics, electromagU (Spring)
netism, some elementary differential equa-
3-0-9
tions. Suitable for majors and non-majors
seeking general background in geophysics Practical applications of the continuum conand Earth structure. cept for deformation of solids and fluids, emC. J. Marone phasizing force balance. Stress tensor,
infinitesimal and finite strain, and rotation tensors developed. Constitutive relations applicable to geological materials, including
elastic, viscous, brittle, and plastic deformation. Solutions to classical problems in
geodynamics, physical oceanography, and atmospheric sciences.
B. H. Hager
Descriptions of Subjects 405
