Department of Earth, Atmospheric, and Planetary Sciences Course 12
12.714 Computational Data Analysis 12.722 Special Problems in Chemical 12.741 Marine Geochemistry
Oceanography at Woods Hole
Prereq.: 18.03 Prereq.: 5.11 or 3.091; 5.60
G (Spring) Prereq.: Permission of instructor G (Spring)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit G (Fall, Spring, Summer) 3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Units arranged [P/D/F H-LEVEL Grad Credit
An introduction to the theory and practice of Geochemical cycle of the elements. ContinenCan be repeated for credit
analyzing discrete data such as are normally tal weathering processes; oceanic hydrotherencountered in geophysics and geology. Em- For graduate students desiring to perform spe- mal systems and fluxes; physical and chemical
phasizes statistical aspects of data interpreta- cial investigations, special laboratory work, or processes in the oceanic water column and in
tion and the nonparametric discrete-time special fieldwork in chemical oceanography. lakes; static versus dynamic models of the
approach to spectral analysis. Topics covered (Woods Hole Staff) chemistry of the atmosphere and oceans over
include elements of probability and statistics, geologic time; authigenic sediments and the
statistical inference, robust and nonparametric 12.730-12.731 Special Problems in Marine control of seawater composition. Emphasizes
statistics, the method of least squares, Geology and Geophysics at MIT development of problems and topics by stuunivariate and multivariate spectral analysis, dents.
digital filters, and aspects of multidimensional Prereq.: Permission of instructor J. M. Edmond
data analysis. G (Fall, Spring, Summer)
A. D. Chave, M. K. McNutt Units arranged [P/D/F] H-LEVEL Grad Credit 12.742 Marine Chemistry
Can be repeated for credit
Prereq.: Permission of instructor
12.716 Igneous Processes at Oceanic For graduate students in the MIT/WHOI Joint
G (Fall)
Margins Program desiring to perform special investiga-
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
tions, special laboratory work, or special
Prereq.: 12.710, 12.711, or permission of infieldwork in marine geology and geophysics Introduction to chemical processes operating
structor
under the supervision of a faculty member in in the oceans (i.e., biogeochemical cycles). InAcad Year 1996-97: Not offered
residence at MIT. 12.730 is letter-graded. cludes oceanic particles; cycling of organic
Acad Year 1997-98: G (Fall)
Marine Geology and Geophysics Staff carbon, phosphorous and nitrogen; carbonate
3-2-4 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
and silica systems; upwelling and low-oxygen
Can be repeated for credit
12.735-12.736 Special Problems in systems; iron and manganese redox systems.
Quantitative analysis of melting, melt transport, Chemical Oceanography at MIT Designed for first- or second-year chemistry,
and igneous crustal accretion at oceanic biology, and geology students.
spreading centers, rifted continental margins, Prereq.: Permission of instructor (Woods Hole Staff): 0. Zafiriou, Staff
and subduction-related arcs, applied to under- G (Fall, Spring, Summer)
standing variation in composition and volume Units arranged [P/D/F] H-LEVEL Grad Credit 12.743 Geochemistry of Marine
of the Earth's crust in different tectonic environ- Can be repeated for credit Sediments
ments. Theoretical methods for calculation of For graduate students in the MIT/WHOI Joint
melt volume and composition, solid-liquid equi- Program desiring to perform special investiga- Prereq.: 5.11 or 3.091; 5.60
libria and reaction rates, and liquid density and tions, special laboratory work, or special Acad Year 1996-97: G (Fall)
viscosity combined with field, petrographic, fieldwork in chemical oceanography under the Acad Year 1997-98: Not offered
geochemical, and computational techniques. supervision of a faculty member in residence 3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Topics vary from year to year. at MIT. 12.735 is letter-graded. Factors influencing the chemical and
(Woods Hole Staff): P. Kelemen Chemical Oceanography Staff mineralogical composition of deep-sea sediments and chemical fluxes across the sedi-
12.718 Kinetics and Mass Transport 12.740 Quaternary Paleoceanography ment-water interface, and their spatial and
temporal variability. Carbonate, silicic, and
Prereq.: Permission of instructor Prereq.: Permission of instructor detrital sediments: sources and reactivity. Pore
Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered water: diffusion, reaction, and fluxes. FerAcad Year 1997-98: G (Spring) Acad Year 1997-98: G (Spring) romanganese sediments and manganese
3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit 3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit nodule geochemistry. Trace element sedimenOffers a broad overview of various kinetic and History of the earth-surface environment tary geochemistry. Sediment dating and actransport processes in geology, including during the past 2 million years as deduced cumulation rate estimation. Stable isotopes
volume and grain boundary solid-state dif- from the records preserved in deep-sea sedi- and natural-series radioisotopes. Effect of
fusion, defects in minerals, rates of mineral ments, ice cores, and corals. Uses climate change on sedimentary processes.
reaction and transformation, crystal nucleation micropaleontological, isotopic, geochemical, Mathematical techniques and modeling in
and growth, advective transport in porous and mineralogical changes to infer changes in sedimentary systems.
media and partially molten aggregates, and seawater composition, atmospheric chemistry, E. A. Boyle
percolation theory. Emphasis on processes in and climate. These changes are used to infer
crystalline rocks. Covers theoretical, changes in the temperature and current field of 12.744 Marine Isotope Chemistry
phenomenological, and experimental con- the ocean. Discussion of processes proposed
straints, with a consistent application to "real- to account for glacial/interglacial cycles (orbital Prereq.: 12.742 or 12.741
world" settings and actual case histories. forcing and internal oscillations) and abrupt Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
(Woods Hole Staff): G. Hirth, S. Hart century-scale climate changes. Evaluation of Acad Year 1997-98: G (Spring)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
theories of environmental change in view of
12.721 Special Problems in Marine Geology the paleoclimatic record of climate change. Treats important aspects of radionuclides and
and Geophysics at Woods Hole E. A. Boyle stable isotopes as applied to the oceans. Includes introduction to radioactivity, naturalP G re (F re a q ll . , : S P p e ri r n m g i , s s S io u n m m of e i r n ) structor series radionuclides (i.e., 1'Pb, 2'0Po, Th, U),
U Ca n n its b a e r r r a e n p g e e a d te d [ P fo /D r I c F r ] e d H it -LEVEL Grad Credit a "3 r tif " 4 ic P ia u l ) , ra a d nd io n s u y c s l t i e d m es a t ( ic i.e s ., o f " C se , v 'H er , al '3 7 s C ta s, b l I e Sr,
isotopes (e.g., Nd, Sr, C, N, 0).
For graduate students desiring to perform spe- (Woods Hole Staff): K. Buesseler, W. Jenkins,
cial investigations, special laboratory work, or M. Kurz
special fieldwork in marine geology and
geophysics.
(Woods Hole Staff)
Descriptions of Subjects 415
