School of Science
12.603 Solar System Dynamics 12.620J Variational Mechanics: A
Computational Approach
Prereq.: Permission of instructor
Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered (Same subject as 6.946J, 8.351J)
Acad Year 1997-98: G (Fall) Prereq.: 8.01, 18.03, 6.001 or equivalent
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit G (Fall)
Can be repeated for credit 3-3-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Introduction to chaotic behavior in conserva- Classical mechanics in a computational
tive systems, with examples drawn primarily framework. Lagrangian formulation. Action,
from the rotation and orbital dynamics of variational principles. Hamilton's principle. Conplanets and satellites. Includes surfaces of sec- served quantities. Hamiltonian formulation. Surtion, Lyapunov exponents, perturbation theory, faces of section. Chaos. Liouville's theorem
KAM theorem, resonances, onset of chaos, and Poincar6 integral invariants. Poincaredouble pendulum, Henon-Heiles problem, Birkhoff and KAM theorems. Invariant
restricted three-body problem, spin-orbit cou- curves. Cantori. Nonlinear resonances.
pling, orbital resonances, adiabatic invariants, Resonance overlap and transition to chaos.
adiabatic chaos, tidal evolution, capture into Properties of chaotic motion. Transport, difresonance, stability of the solar system. fusion, mixing. Symplectic integration.
J. Wisdom Adiabatic invariants. Many-dimensional systems, Arnold diffusion. Extensive use of com-
12.611 Advanced Planetary Observations putation to capture methods, for simulation,
and for symbolic analysis.
Prereq.: Permission of instructor J. Wisdom, G. J. Sussman
G (lAP)
0-6-3 [P/D/F] H-LEVEL Grad Credit
12.650 Current Topics in Planetary
Can be repeated for credit
Science
Astronomical observations involving several
Prereq.: Permission of instructor
techniques are carried out at a major obserG (Spring)
vatory, with focus on a particular set of objec-
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
tives that change from year to year. Work Can be repeated for credit
includes 1) critical planning of the observations, 2) acquiring the data, 3) calibrating the In-depth discussion of current and classic
data, and 4) on-site data reduction. literature on selected topics in planetary
J. L. Elliot science. Topics vary from year to year.
J. Wisdom
12.616 Occultation Studies of the Solar
System 12.690-12.691 Special Problems in
(New) Planetary Science
Prereq.: 8.03, 18.03 or 18.034 Prereq.:
Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: G (Spring)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Basic principles underlying the techniques of
occultations by solar system bodies, observed
throughout the electromagnetic spectrum from
spacecraft and Earth-based platforms. The interaction of electromagnetic radiation with
planetary atmospheres and rings. Astrometric
methods used to predict occultations. Physical
models for atmospheres and rings that have
been developed from occultation data.
J. L. Elliot
-
12.708 Special Topics in Paleoceanography
Prereq.: Permission of instructor
G (Fall)
Units arranged [P/D/F] H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit
Advanced seminar focusing on areas of current interest in paleoceanography ana
paleoclimatology. Includes discussion of current and classic literature. Topics vary from
year to year.
M. E Raymo
12.710 Marine Geology and Geophysics I
Prereq.: Permission of instructor
G (Fall)
3-2-7 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
An introduction to marine geology and
geophysics intended as part of a two-semester
sequence for first-year MIT-WHOI Joint Program students in marine geology and
geophysics. Topics covered include the theory
of plate tectonics, processes of deep-sea
sedimentation, paleoceanography, and the
evolution of the Mesozoic-Cenozoic global
oceans.
R. Detrick, M. Raymo, G. Giese, R. Stephen
12.711 Marine Geology and Geophysics 11
Prereq.: 12.710
G (Spring)
3-2-7 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
An introduction to marine geology and
geophysics intended as part of a two-semester
sequence for first-year MIT-WHOI Joint Program students in marine geology and
geophysics. Topics covered this semester include lithosphere evolution and mantle
G (Fall, Spring, Summer)
dynamics, the structure and composition of the
Units arranged [P/D/F] H-LEVEL Grad Credit
oceanic crust and mantle, tectonic and magCan be repeated for credit
matic processes at mid-ocean ridges, hotspot
For graduate students desiring to perform spe- volcanism, subduction and arc magmatism,
cial investigations, special laboratory work, or and the crustal structure and sedimentation
special fieldwork in planetary science. 12.690 history of contirental margins.
is letter-graded. R. Detrick, N. Shimizu, R. Stephen
Planetary Science Staff
12.712 Advanced Marine Seismology
Prereq.: 12.711
Acad Year 1996-97: G (Fall, Spring)
Acad Year 1997-98: Not offered Geological, Geophysical, and 3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Chemical Oceanography Can be repeated for credit
Advanced subject on theory and practice of
12.707 Pre-Pleistocene Paleoceanography marine seismology. Topics: seismic wave
and Paleoclimatology propagation; marine reflection and refraction
seismology, including seismic data processing,
Prereq.: Permission of instructor modeling, and inversion of multichannel data.
Acad Year 1996-97: G (Spring) Extensive readings of geophysical literature.
Acad Year 1997-98: Not offered (Woods Hole Staff): R. Stephen, R. Detrick
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Climate history of the Earth from the formation
of the early atmosphere and ocean to the
present. Evaluation of geochemical, sedimentological, and paleontological evidence for
changes in ocean circulation, global temperatures, and atmospheric carbon dioxide levels.
Theories and models of Phanerozoic climate
change. Long-term history of the global carbon
cycle.
M. E. Raymo
414 Chapter Vill
