Department of Earth, Atmospheric, and Planetary Sciences Course 12
12.805 Laboratory in Physical 12.810 Dynamics of the Atmosphere 12.814 Global Transport Modeling
Oceanography
Prereq.: 12.800 Prereq.: Permission of instructor
Prereq.: 12.808 G (Spring) Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
G (Spring) 3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit Acad Year 1997-98: G (Fall)
2-2-5 H-LEVEL Grad Credit 3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Review of equations of motion. Zonally
An introduction to standard data analysis averaged budgets of heat, momentum, and The theory and practice of modeling globalmethods including time series analysis, objec- water vapor. Review of historical under- scale transport of trace gases is reviewed,
tive mapping, empirical orthogonal functions, standing of the maintenance of zonal winds. primarily through reading and discussing the
and dynamic analysis of hydrographic data. Symmetric models of the general circulation. relevant literature. Taught in two parts: twoEmphasis on working with data in a computer Introduction to waves and eddies in nonrotat- dimensional (longitudinally averaged) models,
laboratory setting using packaged software. ing and rotating fluids: specifically internal mostly but not exclusively concentrating on
Where appropriate, comparison is made with gravity waves, tides, Rossby waves, barotropic models of stratospheric ozone, and threesimple models. Some attention given to the in- and baroclinic instabilities. The interaction of dimensional models of tropospheric gases. Emstruments and algorithms used to acquire the these asymmetric components of atmospheric phasizes transport rather than chemistry, and
data. motion with the zonally averaged circulation the conceptual basis for and application of
(Woods Hole Staff): B. Owens discussed. Emphasis on specific observed such models, rather than their detailed
phenomena. numerics.
12.806 Atmospheric Physics and R. S. Lindzen R. A. Plumb
Chemistry I
12.811 Tropical Meteorology 12.816 Numerical Modeling of the
Prereq.: 5.61, 18.075
Atmosphere
G (Fall) (Subject meets with 12.337)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit Prereq.: 12.803 Prereq.: 12.803, 12.810
G (Spring) Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Introduces atmospheric physics and chemistry.
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit Acad Year 1997-98: G (Spring)
Transfer of solar and thermal radiation and
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
radiative heating. Atmospheric thermal struc- A description of the large-scale circulation systure, differential heating, and energy budget. tems of the tropical atmosphere and analysis Presentation of the numerical methods used in
Atmospheric chemistry including kinetics, con- of the dynamics of such systems. Topics in- atmospheric models: grid point methods, time
tinuity, transport, and chemical-radiative- clude: interaction between the convective differencing schemes, spectral transform
dynamical feedbacks. Application to ozone scales and the large-scale flow, importance of methods, solution to elliptic and parabolic
layer and Antarctic ozone hole. moisture and latent heat release; equatorial equations. Hierarchy of numerical prediction
R. G. Prinn, M. J. Molina waves; the Hadley circulation; monsoons; models. Representation of physical processes
theory of the response of the tropical atmos- in atmospheric models. Objective analysis and
12.807 Atmospheric Physics and phere to localized sea-surface temperature initialization. Discussions on the use of numeriChemistry 11 anomalies; the Walker circulation; cal models in weather and climate prediction.
mechanisms coupling tropics with midlatitudes; E. Chang
Prereq.: 12.806 intraseasonal oscillations; El Niho/Southern
G (Spring) Oscillation; easterly waves; tropical cyclones. 12.818 Introduction to Atmospheric Data
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit R. A. Plumb and Synoptic Meteorology
Radiative transfer including Mie theory scatter- (Revised Units)
ing and non-grey effects. Physics of green- 12.812 General Circulation of the Earth's
(Subject meets with 12.338)
house effect, chemistry of greenhouse gases Atmosphere
Prereq.: 12.800
and models for warming. Physics and
Prereq.: 12.810 or 12.803 G (Spring)
chemistry of clouds. Chemistry of the tropoG (Fall) 3-3-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
sphere on urban, regional, and global scales.
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Satellite remote sensing and inversion Provides a general introduction to meteorologimethods. Diagnostic studies and discussion of their im- cal data and analysis techniques, and their
M. J. Molina, R. G. Prinn plications for the theory of the structure and use in the MIT Synoptic Laboratory to study
general circulation of the Earth's atmosphere. the phenomenology and dynamics of large-
12.808 Introduction to Observational Includes some discussion of the validation and scale atmospheric flow. Balance concepts as
Physical Oceanography use of general circulation models as atmos- applied to the dynamics of frontal and synoptic
pheric analogs. scales are illustrated using real-time upper air
Prereq.: Permission of instructor P. H. Stone, R. D. Rosen and surface station data and gridded analyzed
G (Fall) fields. Advanced meteorological software pack-
3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit 12.813 Atmospheric Convection ages are used to access, manipulate, and
An introduction to the results and techniques graphically display the data. Statistical
of observations of the ocean in the context of Prereq.: 12.800 methods such as optimal interpolation, EOF,
its physical properties and dynamical con- Acad Year 1996-97: G (Spring) and time series analyses are discussed.
straints. Emphasis on large-scale steady cir- Acad Year 1997-98: Not offered L. Illari, E. Chang
3-3-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
culation and the time-dependent processes
that contribute to it. Includes the physical set- Introduction and theory of dry convection over
ting of the ocean, atmospheric forcing, applica- isolated heat sources. Basic theory of Rayleigh
tion of conservation laws, description of convection. Extensive treatment of the therwind-driven and thermohaline circulation, eddy modynamics of moist and cloudy air. Observaprocesses, and interpretive techniques. tions and dynamics of isolated convective
(Woods Hole Staff): N. Hogg clouds; turbulence in saturated and partly
saturated mixtures. Moist- and dry-convective
boundary layers. Organization of moist convection on larger scales and interaction of convective ensembles with the large-scale
environment.
K. A. Emanuel
Descriptions of Subjects 417
