School of Engineering
Course 13 Ocean Engineering
For degree requirements, see listing in
Chapter VII under the School of
Engineering.
13.UR Undergraduate Research
Prereq.: -
13.013J Systems Modeling and Dynamics 11 13.016 Introduction to Geometric Modeling
and Computation
(Same subject as 2.004J, 2.03J)
U (Fall, Spring, Summer) Prereq.: 2.001 and 2.003 or 13.015 Prereq.: 8.01, 18.02
Units arranged [P/D/F] U (Fall, Spring) U (Fall)
Can be repeated for credit 4-0-5 3-0-9 REST
Research in engineering for the ocean environ- See description under subject 2.004J. Development of mathematical representations
ment, including naval architecture, wave ener- J. H. Williams, Jr., J. K. Vandiver of curves and surfaces for use in computergy, seakeeping, ocean exploration, ocean aided design and engineering analysis, from
transportation, ocean vehicles, utilization of 13.014 Marine Structures and Materials simple polynomials to general non-uniform raresources, marine economics, systems tional B-splines. Numerical integration and difPrereq.: 2.001, 18.03
analysis, marine policy, marine ferentiation. Software engineering concepts.
hydrodynamics, ocean acoustics, ocean struc- U (Fall) Code design, development, debugging and
3-0-9
tures, sailing yachts, and some aspects of maintenance. Fortran 77 syntax, data types,
marine-related management. Hands-on ex- Fundamentals of solid mechanics and subroutines. Emphasis on engineering modellperimental research in modern laboratory materials science needed for design and ing and design in computational environment.
facilities. fabrication of marine structures. Topics related Homework projects developed around ocean
D. K.-P. Yue to solid mechanics inciude advanced beam engineering applications include writing
theory, beam buckling, plastic beam response, Fortran 77 programs and using software
13.010 Introduction to Ocean Science and and structural failure. Topics related to developed under Project Athena.
Technology materials science include atomic structures of J. E. Kerwin
materials, phase diagrams, mechanical properPrereq.: 8.01, 18.02
ties, cutting and joining techniques. 13.017 Design of Ocean Systems I
U (Fall)
K. Masubuchi, H. Schmidt
3-0-9 REST Prereq.: 2.001, 6.071, 13.016, 13.012
U (Spring)
Introductory subject for students majoring or 13.015 Mathematical Methods in Ocean 3-4-5 Institute LAB
minoring in ocean engineering and others Engineering
desiring introductory knowledge in the field. 13.018 Design of Ocean Systems 11
Physical oceanography including distributions Prereq.: 18.03
of salinity, temperature, and density; heat U (Spring) Prereq.: 13.017
balance; major ocean circulations and 3-0-9 U (Fall)
1-4-7 Institute LAB
geostrophic flows; and influence of wind Mathematical methods are developed for the
stress. Surface waves including wave solution of physical problems arising in ocean A two-semester subject sequence that
velocities, propagation phenomena, and engineering. Model problems from demonstrates the design process through apdescriptions of real sea waves. Acoustics in hydrodynamics, wave propagation, vibrations, plication to small-scale ocean systems. Emthe ocean including influence of water proper- structural mechanics, and signal processing phasis on carrying out the design and
ties on sound speed and refraction, sounds are formulated and solved using the theory of implementation of a system, including
generated by ships and marine animals, fun- ordinary differential equations, complex vari- demonstration of its operation in the marine endamentals of sonar, types of sonar systems ables and complex contour integration, vironment. Fall Term: Introduction to the
and their principles of operation. Laplace and Fourier transforms, convolution, design process and its application in the
T. F. Ogilvie impulse response functions, and Fourier series. marine environment. Design project with stuP. D. Sclavounos dents developing system definition and com-
13.012 Fluid Mechanics for Ocean pleting its preliminary design. Students are
Engineers instructed in the use of the machine shop and
are required to implement mechanical, electriPrereq.: 13.010, 18.03
cal, and electronic components of the sysU (Spring)
tems. Spring Term: Students work in small
4-3-8
groups to design and implement system
Development of the fundamental equations of defined in 13.017, including demonstration of
fluid mechanics and their simplifications for its operation in the laboratory or marine enseveral areas of marine hydrodynamics. Ap- vironment. Students design, plan, construct,
plication of these equations to a wide variety of and operate a small-scale ocean system, or
problems of interest to ocean engineers rang- plan, develop experimental apparatus, acquire
ing from local boundary layer flows on a small data, and report the analysis of an experiment
underwater vehicle to global oceanic flows; in the ocean or the laboratory. Subject varies
ocean tides. Hydrostatic behavior of floating from year to year. The specific topic is made
and submerged bodies, lift and drag forces, available to students during IAP before the first
water waves and wave forces on ships and term of the subject sequence. Each of these
platforms. subjects satisfies six units of the General InT. F. Ogilvie stitute Laboratory Requirement.
M. S. Triantafyllou
420 Chapter VIII
