Department of Aeronautics and Astronautics Course 16
16.458J Biomedical Instrumentation
Electronics
(Same subject as HST.570J, 2.781J)
Prereq.: Permission of instructor
G (Summer)
6-6-6
See description under subject HST.570J.
D. Rowell, S. K. Bums
16.459 Bioengineering Journal Article
Seminar
Prereq.: -
16.512 Rocket Propulsion 16.540 Internal Flows in Turbomachines
Prereq.: 16.50 Prereq.: 16.121 or 16.122 or 2.25
G (Fall) Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
3-0-9 Acad Year 1997-98: G (Spring)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Chemical rocket propulsion systems for
launch, orbital, and interplanetary flight. Model- General features of internal flows with applicaing of solid, liquid-bipropellant, and hybrid rock- tion to compressors, turbines, and propulsion
et engines. Thermochemistry, prediction of systems. Fundamental concepts of rotational
specific impulse. Nozzle flows including real flows, inherent unsteadiness of turbogas and kinetic effects. Structural constraints. machines, boundary layers, wakes, and losses
Propellant feed systems, turbopumps. Com- and mixing in turbomachines. Axisymmetric
bustion processes in solid, liquid, and hybrid swirling and vortex core flows, streamline currockets. Cooling; heat sink, ablative, and vature computations, flows in rotating blade
G (Fall, Spring) regenerative. rows. Effects of viscosity and compressibility in
0-2-0 A. H. Epstein internal flows. Secondary flows and threeCan be repeated for credit dimensional effects. Flow instabilities in turEach term, the class selects a new set of 16.521 Aircraft Turbine Engine Design bomachines. Recent developments and
professional journal articles on bioengineering experimental information. Alternate years.
topics of current research interest. Some Prereq.: 16.511 or permission of instructor E. M. Greitzer
Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
papers are chosen because of particular conAcad Year 1997-98: G (Fall)
tent, others are selected because they il- 16.55 Ionized Gases
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
lustrate important points of methodology. Each
Prereq.: 8.03
week, one student leads the discussion, Fluid mechanics, thermodynamics, and solid
Acad Year 1996-97: G (Spring)
evaluating the strengths, weaknesses, and im- mechanics of aircraft turbine engines, with the
Acad Year 1997-98: Not offered
portance of each paper. Subject may be emphasis on design. Steady two-dimensional
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
repeated for credit a maximum of four terms. and three-dimensional flow theories of comLetter grade given in the last term applies to all pressors and turbines. Combuster design. Properties and behavior of low-temperature
accumulated units of 16.459. Noise and emission considerations. Operation- plasmas for energy conversion, plasma propulL. R. Young, C. M. Oman al limitations and instabilities. Stress and as- sion, gas lasers. Equilibrium of ionized gases:
sociated temperature limits and influence of energy states, statistical mechanics, and equiblade cooling techniques on turbines. librium. Kinetic theory: motion of charged parA.H. Epstein ticles, distribution function, collisions,
characteristic lengths and times, cross-secPropulsion and Energy 16.522 Space Propulsion tions, transport properties. Gas surface interactions: thermionic emission, sheaths, probe
Conversion Prereq.: 16.512, 8.03 theory. Radiation in plasmas, diagnostics. AlG (Spring) ternate years.
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit M. Martinez-Sanchez
16.50 Introduction to Propulsion Systems
Reviews rocket propulsion fundamentals. DisPrereq.: 16.050 cusses advanced concepts in rocket propul- 16.58 Aircraft Gas Turbine Structures
U (Spring) sion ranging from chemical engines to
3-0-9 electrical engines. Topics include advanced Prereq.: 16.511 or permission of instructor
G (Spring)
Presents aerospace propulsive devices as sys- mission analysis, physics and engineering of 3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
tems, with functional requirements and en- microthrusters, and solid propellant rockets,
gineering and environmental limitations. electrothermal, electrostatic, and electro-mag- Examines the structural design of aircraft gas
Requirements and limitations constrain design netic schemes for accelerating propellant. turbine engines as set by the (multidisciplinary)
choices. Both air-breathing and rocket engines Some coverage is given of satellite power sys- coupling between aerodynamic, thermal, and
covered, at a level which enables rational in- tems and their relation to propulsion systems. structural requirements for high-performance
tegration of the propulsive system into an over- M. Martinez-Sanchez propulsion systems. Topics include structures
all vehicle design. Mission analysis, under static loads, rotor dynamics and vibrafundamental performance relations, and ex- 16.523 Environmental Aerospace tion (design of rotating blades and disks, critiemplary design solutions presented. Engineering cal speed of rotating shafts, flutter and forced
J. L. Kerrebrock response of compressor and turbine blades),
Prereq.: 16.511 or permission of instructor low-cycle fatigue, and design considerations
G (Spring)
for hot-section components used in gas tur-
16.511 Aircraft Engines and Gas Turbines 3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit bine engines.
Prereq.: 16.50 Focuses on understanding, evaluating, and A. H. Epstein, E M. Greitzer, F. Ehrich
G (Fall) developing design procedures to reduce the
3-0-9 environmental impact of current and future
Performance and characteristics of aircraft en- aerospace systems, primarily aircraft emisgines and industrial gas turbines, as deter- sions and noise. Principles of reacting flows,
mined by thermodynamic and fluid mechanic combustor design, fundamentals of acoustics,
and aircraft and engine noise sources are
behavior of components: inlets, compressors,
combustors, turbines, nozzles. Discusses presented within a broad contextual backdrop
various engine types, including turbojet, tur- that includes discussions of ethics, human and
bofan, and turboprop. Limitations imposed by global effects, the regulatory process,
material properties and stresses. Emphasizes economics, urban planning, and environmental
future design trends, including reduction noise, policy.
pollutant formation, fuel consumption, and /. A. Waitz
weight.
I. A. Waitz
Descriptions of Subjects 459
