School of Management Course 15
Information Technologies 15.565 Information Technology II: 15.574 Theoretical Foundations for
Dynamics of the IT Industry Information Technology
15.561 Information Systems: From Prereq.: 15.564 or equivalent Prereq.: 15.561 or programming experience
Technology Infrastructure to the Networked G (Spring) G (Spring)
Corporation 3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit 3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Prereq.: Permission of instructor Provides broad coverage of current trends and Presents a theoretical background for many imG (Spring) perspectives of the information Technology portant topics in information technology such
2-0-4 H-LEVEL Grad Credit (IT) industry, with an emphasis on modern as efficiency of algorithms, computer perfordatabase technology. Presents basic prin- mance evaluation, computer communications,
Fundamental principles for the effective use of ciples of database technology and framework parallel processing, and database managecomputer-based information systems (IS). for integrating concepts essential to the under- ment systems. Theoretical foundations are
Focuses on the strategic and organizational im- standing of the IT industry dynamics. Students drawn from areas such as combinatorics,
plications of the key technologies. Topics: develop a sensitivity to the critical issues queuing theory, concurrency control, theorem
trends in core technologies; the coalescing in- facing the computer industry and emerging proving, and Petri nets. Primarily for doctoral
dustries of computers, communications, infor- trends. Topics are substantiated by speakers students. Offered every third year.
mation services. electronics, and media; the such as prominent scholars, IT vendors, and Information: S. E. MadnicK.
current state of the art in IS design; using IS to chief information officers.
support work and gain competitive advantage; Information: S. E. Madnick. 15.575 Research Seminar in Information
reinventing business processes for the next
Technology and Organizations: Economic
decade; evaluating and managing advanced in- 15.566 Information Technology as an Perspectives
formation technologies; the networked corpora- Integrating Force in Manufacturing
tion. Primarily for Sloan Master's students. Prereq.: Permission of instructor
S. E. Madnick, W. j. Orlikowski, E. Brynjolfsson Prereq.: Permission of instructor Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
G (Spring) Acad Year 1997-98: G (Fall)
3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit 3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
15.563 Inventing the Organizations of the
21st Century Focuses on the key role that information tech- Builds upon relevant economic theories and
Prereq.: 15.561 or permission of instructor nology plays in enabling organizational change methodologies to analyze the changes
and integration, especialy in manufacturing. enabled by information technology within and
G (Spring)
3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit Taught in a seminar format with presentations between organizations. Typical perspectives
by faculty, students, and company repre- examined include principal-agent theory and inFocuses on alternative ways work may be or- sentatives. Topics: 1) core technologies, includ- stitutional economics, industrial organization,
ganized in the future. Special emphasis on ing computer hardware architectures, software strategic frameworks, intellectual property,
how new computer and communications tech- design principles, communications, and net- productivity assessment, and technology difnologies, along with new views of human na- works; 2) applications such as flexible fusion. Extensive reading and discussion of reture, may enable new organizational forms to manufacturing, CAD/CAM, and knowledge- search literature aimed at exploring the
emerge. Topics include: examples of new or- based systems; 3) intra- and inter-organization- application of these theories and illustrating alganizational forms (such as networked or- al issues, such as business process redesign, ternative research methods used in their
ganizations, "adhocracies," virtual networked organizations, and supply chain development and testing. Primarily for doctoral
corporations, and electronic markets), new management. Offered jointly with LFM pro- students. Offered every third year.
technologies (such as computer-supported gram. E. Brynjolfsson
cooperative work, groupware, and EDI), and E. Brynjolfsson
new concepts for organizational design (such
15.576 Research Seminar in Information
as reengineering and business process 15.568 Management Information Systems Technology and Organizations: Social
analysis).
Perspectives
T. W Malone Prereq.: 15.561 or equivalent
G (Fall, Spring) Prereq.: Permission of instructor
3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit Acad Year 1996-97: G (Fall)
15.564 Information Technology I
Acad Year 1997-98: Not offered
Prereq.: 15.561 or permission of instructor Concepts, frameworks, tools, techniques, and 3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
processes that assist management in its interG (Fall, Spring)
4-0-8 H-LEVEL Grad Credit action with and direction of computer-based in- Examines the assumptions, concepts,
formation systems today. Emphasis on theories, and methodologies that inform reBroad coverage of technology concepts under- reengineering of information flows to meet the search into the behavioral aspects of informalying modern computing and information needs of both control and empowerment in the tion technology. Extensive reading and
management. Topics include computer ar- era of the global information infrastructure and discussion of research literature aimed at exchitecture and operating systems, information networked organizations. Emphasizes ploring micro, group, and macro level social
retrieval techniques, graphical user interfaces, managerial point of view and organizational is- phenomena surrounding the development, imnetworks, groupware, and cryptography. sues involved in managing a firm's information plementation, use and implications of informaHands-on exposure to Internet services, SQL resources. tion technology in organizations. Primarily for
database language, PowerBuilder graphical in- J. F. Rockart doctoral students. Alternate years.
terface language, and Lotus Notes. W. J. Orlikowski
information: S. E. Madnick.
Descriptions of Subjects 445
