School of Engineering
Other Undergraduate Subjects
16.UR Undergraduate Research
Prereq.: --
U (Fall, IAP, Spring)
Units arranged [P/D/F]
Can be repeated for credit
16.URG Undergraduate Research
Prereq.: -
16.64 Flight Measurement Laboratory
Prereq.: 16.020
U (Spring)
2-2-2
Opportunity to see aeronautical theory applied
in real-world environment of flight. Students assist in design and execution of simple engineering flight experiments in light aircraft. Typical
investigations include determination of stability
derivatives, verification of performance
U (Fall, IAP, Spring) specifications, and measurement of navigation
system characteristics. Limited to students in
Units arranged Aeronautics and Astronautics.
Can be repeated for credit R. J. Hansman
Undergraduate research opportunities in
aeronautics and astronautics. For further infor- 16.651 Computer Models of Physical and
mation, contact W. R. Markey, Departmental Engineering Systems
Coordinator.
Prereq.: 18.03 or 18.034, 1.00
U (Spring)
16.600 Computational Tools for Engineering
3-1-8
Prereq.: 16.010, 16.020, or equivalent
Engineering School-Wide Elective Subject.
U (IAP)
Description given at end of this chapter in
1-1-4 [P/D/F]
SWE section on page 999.
Introduction to computational tools and their F. Peha-Mora
use in solving engineering problems, analyzing
data, and presenting scientific results. 16.652 Inventions and Patents
Techniques for the practical use of spreadsheets (XESS), mathematical and numerical Prereq.: 14.02
analysis packages (MATLAB), symbolic al- U (Fall)
gebra (MAPLE), and other Athena-based 3-0-6
software packages are presented. Issues of
Engineering School-Wide Elective Subject.
computational accuracy and efficiency are dis- Description given at end of this chapter in
cussed. Emphasizes problem solving using SWE section on page 999.
available software packages, not programming R. H. Rines
or algorithmic development. Enrollment may
be limited.
16.653 Management in Engineering
J. D. Paduano
Prereq.:
16.621 Experimental Projects I
Prereq.: 6.041, 16.050, 16.060
U (Fall, Spring)
2-1-3
Introduces laboratory experimental techniques. Principles of experimental design and
reliable measurement. Laboratory safety. Instruction in effective report writing and oral
presentation. Selection and detailed planning
of an individual research project, including
design of components or equipment. Preparation of a detailed proposal for the selected
project carried through to completion under
16.622.
J. Kuchar, R. F. Perdichizzi
16.622 Experimental Projects 11
Prereq.: 16.621
U (Fall, Spring)
1-7-4 Institute LAB
Helps student gain practical insight and improved understanding of engineering experimentation through design and execution of
"project" experiments. Building upon work in
16.621, student constructs and tests equipment, makes systematic experimental measurements of phenomena, analyzes data,
compares theoretical predictions with results.
Written final report on entire project and formal
oral presentation. Provides valuable link between theory and practice.
J. Kuchar, R. F Perdichizzi
-
16.66 Industrial Practice
Prereq.:
U (Fall)
3-0-9
Engineering School-Wide Elective Subject.
Description given at end of this chapter in
SWE section on page 562.
J.-H. Chun
16.656 Management Topics in Engineering
(New)
Prereq.: Permission of instructor
U (IAP)
2-0-4
Directed toward the student whose objective is
a career in engineering leading to management. Provides opportunities to examine topics
relating to the conduct of engineering activities
within a total management environment. Interfaces between engineerng and other company functions, such as marketing, finance
manufacturing, quality, explored with emphasis on the management process. Special
attention given to the role of technical staff in
the acquisition of new business and longrange planning. Seminar format based on current industrial practice.
J. Yamron
-
U (Fall, Spring)
0-8-0 [P/D/F]
Seven months of engineering practice, carried
out by the cooperative students at the plants of
organizations participating in the cooperative
program.
W. R. Markey
16.67 Engineering Internship
Prereq.: -
U (Summer)
0-6-0 [P/D/F]
Can be repeated for credit
A summer of work experience as part of the
Engineering Internship Program. Students
register for this subject twice, receiving the
grade "J" for the first registration. Two work assignments must be completed in order for
credit to be awarded. Limited to students
registered in Course XVI-C.
I. A. Waitz
16.681 Special Projects
Prereq.: -
U (Fall, IAP, Spring, Summer)
Units arranged
Can be repeated for credit
Study or laboratory project work of undergraduate level by qualified students. Topics
selected in consultation with the instructor.
W. R. Markey
16.682 Selected Topics In Aeronautics and
Astronautics
Prereq.: -
U (Fall, IAP, Spring)
Units arranged
Can be repeated for credit
Study at the undergraduate level by qualified
students. Topics selected in consultation with
the instructor.
W. R. Markey
16.683 Aeronautics and Astronautics
Seminars
Prereq.: -
U (Fall, Spring)
2-0-0 [P/D/F]
Can be repeated for credit
Speakers from campus and industry discuss
current activities and advances in aeronautics
and astronautics. Restricted to Course XVI students.
W. R. Markey
460 Chapter Vill
