Department of Aeronautics and Astronautics Course 16
16.121 Low-Speed Aerodynamics 16.14 Transition and Turbulence Structures and Materials
Prereq.: 16.100 Prereq.: 16.110 or 16.121
G (Fall) G (Spring) 16.20 Structural Mechanics I
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit 4-0-8 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Prereq.: 16.030-16.040
Advanced techniques in fluid mechanics, em- Analysis and description of transitional and tur- U (Fall)
phasizing both the underlying physics and their buient flows drawing from theoretical, numeri- 5-0-7
applications to subsonic and transonic flight cal, and experimental approaches. Linear and
vehicles. Advanced topics in laminar and tur- nonlinear stability theory. Three-dimensional Applies solid mechanics to analysis of highbulent boundary layers. Separation and stall. disturbances and bypass transition. technology structures. Structural design conVorticity kinematics and dynamics. Behavior of Homogeneous turbulence. Kolmogorov theory. siderations. Review of three-dimensional
strong vortices and vortex bursting. Unsteady Structure of turbulence shear flows, including elasticity theory; stress, strain, anisotropic
flows. Low- and high-aspect ratio wings. the dynamics of coherent structures in near- materials, heating effects. Two-dimensional
Slender body theory. Transonic flow. wall boundary layers. Turbulence modeling. plane stress and plane strain problems. TorM. T. Landahl Other topics of current research interest. sion theory for arbitrary sections. Bending of
K. S. Breuer unsymmetrical section and mixed material
beams. Bending, shear, and torsion of thin-
16.122 High-Speed Aerodynamics
wall shell beams. Buckling of columns and
16.150 Unsteady Fluid Mechanics
Prereq.: 16.100 stability phenomena. Introduction to structural
G (Spring) Prereq.: 16.121 dynamics. Exercises in the design of general
4-0-8 H-LEVEL Grad Credit Acad Year 1996-97: G (Fall) and aerospace structures.
Acad Year 1997-98: Not offered H. L. McManus
Aerodynamic loading on wings of high- and
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
low- aspect ratios, and on slender bodies at supersonic speeds. Minimum drag. Transonic Fluid mechanics of fixed airfoils, wings, bodies, 16.202 Manufacturing with Advanced
flow. Hypersonic inviscid flow. Boundary layers and cascades in unsteady potential flows; or Composite Materials
at high Mach numbers moving airfoils, wings, bodies, and cascades in Prereq.:
M. T. Landahl a uniform stream. Methods (analytical and
numerical) for predicting the pressure on un-
16.123 Gases and Fluids in the Space steadily moving bodies in subsonic, transonic,
Environment and supersonic flow. A limited discussion of
viscous effects, boundary layers, aerodynamic
Prereq.: 16.100, 6.041, 8.03 noise generation, flow instability, and separaG (Fall) tion introduced where appropriate. Alternate
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit years.
The space environment. Scales, mean free M. T. Landahl
path. Nondimensional numbers. Temperature
and transport coefficients. Kinetic theory and 16.160 Computational Fluid Dynamics
statistical mechanics (Boltzmann equation,
Prereq.: 16.90 or 18.086, 16.100
Maxwell-Boltzmann distribution, entropy). ConG (Spring)
tinuum equations (boundary conditions, slip,
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
reacting surfaces). Planetary atmospheres.
Electromagnetic environment. Reentry (heat Computational methods for compressible invisbalance). Gravity-free flows. Reaction kinetics. cid and viscous flow. Euler and Navier-Stokes
D. E. Hastings equations in general nonorthogonal, curvilinear coordinates, grid generation, struc-
16.13 Aerodynamics of Viscous Fluids tured and unstructured meshes. Finitedifference, finite-volume, finite-element soluPrereq.: 16.110, or 16.121 or 16.122 tion techniques. Draws applications from interG (Fall) nal and external flow problems in aerospace
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit vehicles. Assignments requiring use of digital
Boundary layers as rational approximations to computer.
the solutions of exact equations of fluid mo- J. Peraire
tion. Physical parameters influencing laminar
and turbulent aerodynamic flows and transition. Effects of compressibility and heat conduction. Influence of boundary layers on outer
potential flow and appropriate numerical solution techniques. Numerical exercises require
familiarity with FORTRAN or similar language.
M. Drela
-
U (Fall)
1-3-2
Introduces the methods used to manufacture
parts made of advanced composite materials
in the Technology Laboratory for Advanced
Composites. Students gain hands-on experience by fabricating, machining, instrumenting, and testing graphite/epoxy specimens.
Students also design, build, and test a composite structure as part of a design contest.
Lectures supplement laboratory sessions with
background information on the nature of composites, curing, composite machining, secondary bonding, and the testing of composites.
S. M. Spearing
16.210 Structural Mechanics I
Prereq.: 16.20
G (Spring)
4-0-8
Introduces analysis techniques for complex
structures and the role of material properties in
structural design, failure, and longevity. Energy
principles in structural analysis and applications to statically-indeterminate structures and
solid continua. Matrix and finite-element
methods of structured analysis including bars,
beams, and two-dimensional plane stress elements. Structural materials and their properties; metals, composites. Modes of structural
failure. Criteria for yielding and fracture. Crack
formation and fracture mechanics. Fatigue and
design for longevity. Other failure modes.
Structural design project.
N. W. Hagood
Descriptions of Subjects 455
