School of Management Course 15
15.249 Special Seminar in International Communication
Management
(New)
15.279 Management Communication for
Prereq.: 15.341, 15.342, or equivalent
Undergraduates
Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: G (Spring) Prereq.:
Units arranged H-LEVEL Grad Credit
An advanced seminar in the evolution and key
analytical frameworks of the field of International Management, covering the major theoretical
work and approaches to empirical research in
the field and linking these to the core
frameworks of strategy and organization
theory. Restricted to doctoral students. Alternate years.
0. E. Westney
History, Environment, and
Ethics
15.268 Choice Points: Readings on the
Exercise of Power and Responsibility
Prereq.: Permission of instructor
G (Spring)
3-0-6 [P/D/F] H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Studies managerial power and responsibility.
Examines conflicts between power and moral
responsibility and the contexts for choice in
dealing with a number of such problems. Readings are principally "classics" used to illustrate
several enduring such issues. Restricted to
Sloan Fellows.
A. J. Siegel
15.269 Literature, Ethics, and Authority
Prereq.: Permission of instructor
G (Spring)
3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Seminar in management ethics and problems
of leadership, examining issues of power and
responsibility as questions arise in close study
of classic and modern works of literature.
Topics include: the sources of authority, the
management of consensus, the ideal of vocation, the ethics of lying, the morality of expediency, the requirements of hierarchy, the
virtues and vices of loyalty, the relevance of
ethical principles in extreme situations. Readings include: Sophocles, Shakespeare, Ibsen,
Shaw, Conrad, Tolstoy, Dostoyevsky; excerpts
from Plato, Machiavelli, Thomas Hobbes,
Adam Smith; some readings in management
ethics.
A. C. Kibel
-
U (Spring)
3-0-9
Seminar designed for Management Science
majors to develop writing and speaking skills
necessary for managers. Students learn communication principles, strategies, and methods
through discussions, exercises, examples, and
cases. A variety of written and oral assignments, in class and in video lab. A major
project yields an original report designed to
satisfy Phase II of the Institute Writing Requirement. Priority given to Course 15 seniors and
juniors.
L. Breslow
15.280 Communication for Managers_
Prereq.: -
Organization Studies
15.301 Managerial Psychology Laboratory
Prereq.:
G (Fall)
1-1-2
Writing and speaking skills necessary for a
career in management. Students polish communication strategies and methods through
discussion of principles, examples, and cases.
Many written and oral assignments, many
based on material from other subjects.
Restricted to first-year Sloan School of
Management graduate students.
J. Yates, L. Breslow, Staff
15.281 Advanced Managerial
Communication
Prereq.: 15.280 or permission of instructor
G (Spring)
3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Builds on managerial communication skills
developed in 15.280. Introduces more interactive oral and interpersonal communication
skills important to managers, including running
and contributing productively to meetings, listening, and contributing to group decision
making. Includes a written report and a long
oral presentation for a business audience,
generally in conjunction with a project for
another subject.
J. Yates
15.289 Doctoral Seminar: Communication
Skills for Academics
Prereq.: Permission of instructor
G (Spring)
2-0-4 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Seminar focuses on the communication skills
needed for a career in academia. Topics include writing for academic journals, preparing
and delivering conference papers and job
talks, and researching and writing grant
proposals. Also examines the theory and practice of teaching. Participants are expected to
work on a written project and deliver an oral
presentation based on their current research,
and teach one class for review. Restricted to
doctoral students who have completed their
first year.
L. Breslow
-
U (Fall, Spring)
2-3-7 Institute LAB
Core subject for students majoring in management science. Surveys individual and social
psychology and organization theory interpreted in the context of the managerial environment. Laboratory involves projects of an
applied nature in behavioral science. Emphasizes use of behavioral science research
methods to test hypotheses concerning organizational behavior.
T. J. Allen
15.306 Behavioral Science Research
Methods
(Subject meets with 15.347)
Prereq.: -
U (Fall)
4-0-8
Introduces methods of behavioral science research. General strategy of behavioral research (quantitative vs qualitative analysis,
hypothesis formulation) and research design
(purposes, variance control, control of extraneous variables, use of control groups, randomized designs, factorial designs). Specific
techniques of various designs (questionnaire
construction, sampling, interviews, systematic
observation). Organization and development
of research project. Meets with graduate subject 15.347.
J. S. Carroll
15.310 Managerial Psychology
Prereq.: -
G (Fall, Spring)
2-0-7
Surveys social psychology and organization
theory interpreted in the context of the
managerial environment. Shares lectures with
15.301, with a separate recitation required.
Equivalent of 15.311 intended primarily for nonCourse XV students.
T. J. Allen
15.311 Organizational Processes
Prereq.: -
G (Fall)
4-0-8
Focuses on the organization of the future, identifies its characteristics, and explores the implications for living in, managing, and leading
such an organization. Also focuses on skills
such as organizational diagnosis, teamwork,
and process analysis. Examines the creation
of the structures, rewards, career paths, and
cultures needed within the firm, and the alliances, learning, and change practices needed to
maintain global performance. Restricted to firstyear Sloan Master's students.
D. G. Ancona, T. A. Kochan, M. A. Scully,
J. Van Maanen
Descriptions of Subjects 439
