School of Management Course 15
15.771J Case Studies in Logistics and 15.792J Proseminar in Manufacturing
Supply Chain Management
(Same subject as 2.890J, 3.80J, 10.792J,
(Same subject as 1.209J) 16.985J)
Prereq.: Permission of instructor Prereq.:
Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: G (Fall)
3-0-6
See description under subject 1.209J.
Y. Sheffi
15.778 Managing Services: Concepts,
Design, and Delivery
Prereq.: Permission of instructor
G (Summer)
2-0-4 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Explores the difference between service and
manufacturing operations, and the degree of
distinct management skills and tools required.
Analyzes cases selected from a variety of service operations. Guest speakers from specific
service industries discuss the essence of
managing those operations. Restricted to
Sloan Fellows and Management of Technology students.
G. R. Bitran
15.779 Manufacturing Management
Prereq.: Permission of instructor
G (Summer)
2-0-4 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Provides framework for analyzing strategic issues in manufacturing. Analyzes relationships
between manufacturing managers and their
suppliers, customers, competitors, superiors,
and hourly workers. Also covers the interface
between manufacturing and marketing, engineering, quality, purchasing, finance, and accounting. Devotes a moderate amount of time
to international manufacturing competition.
Restricted to Sloan Fellows and Management
of Technology programs.
G. R. Bitran
15.783J Product Design and Development
(Same subject as 2.739J)
Prereq.: 15.760 or 15.761 or 2.731 or 2.73 or
permission of instructor
G (Spring)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Covers modern tools and methods for product
design and development. The cornerstone is a
project in which teams of management, engineering, and industrial design students conceive, design, and prototype a physical
product. Class sessions are conducted in
workshop mode and employ cases and handson exercises to reinforce the key ideas. Topics
include identifying customer needs, concept
generation, product architecture, industrial
design, and design-for-manufacturing.
S. D. Eppinger, D. E. Westney
-
G (Fall, Spring)
Units arranged [P/D/F]
Can be repeated for credit
Provides an integrative forum for LFM students and is the focus for projects in leadership, service, and improvement. The seminar
covers a set of integrative manufacturing
topics or issues such as leadership and related
topics, and includes presentations by guest
speakers. During the Spring term, students
use the seminar to help prepare for internships. The seminar is largely managed by students. Primarily for LFM Fellows.
D. B. Rosenfield, J. S. Carroll
15.794 Research Project in
Manufacturing
Prereq.: -
G (Fall, Spring, Summer)
Units arranged [P/D/F] H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit
A special projects subject designed for
Leaders for Manufacturing (LFM) students in
conjunction with on-site projects at LFM
partner companies. Student teams work on
faculty-supervised thesis research projects
that deal with a specific aspect of manufacturing. Students are also required to summarize
their work in the context of understanding organization, leadership, teamwork, and task
management in conjunction with 15.31 6.
D. B. Rosenfield, J. S. Carroll
15.795 Seminar in Operations
Management
Prereq.: 15.760 or 15.761
G (Fall, Spring)
3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit
Topics vary from year to year. Typical examples from past years: manufacturing
strategy, technology supply chains.
C. H. Fine
15.799 Workshop in Operations
Management
Prereq.: -
Marketing
15.810 Introduction to Marketing
Prereq.: Completion of Sloan Master's Core
G (Spring)
2-0-4 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Introduces a customer orientation and its implications for the enterprise. How to listen to
the customer and how to translate what is
learned into product design. How to see a selling process from the customer's perspective
and how to evaluate alternative technologies
for communication and delivery. Lectures and
cases. Class meets three times per week for
half the term. Restricted to graduate students
in the Sloan School of Management. Others
please note 15.812.
B. Wernerfelt
15.811 Marketing Management
Prereq.: 15.063 or equivalent
G (Fall)
3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
An examination of the key concepts and
processes of marketing, from the perspective
of the general manager. Customer analysis (including buyer behavior and market segmentation) provides the foundation for marketing
strategy (involving product policy, pricing, communication, and channels of distribution).
Restricted to Sloan Fellows.
B. E. Bund
15.812 Marketing Management
Prereq.: 14.01
G (Fall, Spring)
3-0-6
Similar content to 15.810, but coverage is
deeper and more extensive. Primarily for nonSloan School graduate students and undergraduate students. In the event the subject is
oversubscribed, priority is given to Course 15
students.
S. Jap, W. J. Qualls
15.814 Marketing Management
Prereq.: 15.061 or equivalent
G (Fall)
3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
An examination of the key concepts and
G (Fall, Spring)
processes of marketing, with emphasis on the
Units arranged
relationship of marketing and R&D. Customer
Can be repeated for credit
analysis (including buyer behavior and market
Presentations by faculty, doctoral students, segmentation) provides the foundation for
and guest speakers of ongoing research relat- marketing strategy (involving product policy,
ing to current issues in operations manage- pricing, communication, and channels of disment, including reports of research projects tribution). Restricted to Management of Tech-
(proposed or in progress) and informal discus- nology students.
sions of recent literature dealing with subjects B. E. Bund
of special interest to participants. Primarily for
doctoral students.
Information: C. H. Fine, L. M. Wein.
Descriptions of Subjects 449
