Sloan School of Management
15.312 Managerial Decision Making 15.316 Organizational Leadership and 15.341 Individuals, Groups, and
Prereq.: 15.301 or 15.310 or 15.311 or Change Organizations
(Revised Units)
permission of instructor Prereq.:
G (Spring) Prereq.: 15.794 G (Fall)
3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit G (IAP, Spring, Summer) 3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Units arranged [P/D/F] H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Examines individual managerial behavior with Develops basic concepts for understanding inCan be repeated for credit
emphasis on cognitive processes in judgment dividual, group, and organizational behavior
and choice. Includes judgment under uncer- Affords a structured debriefing of the LFM through critical analysis of important works in
tainty, biases and corrective procedures, risk internship experience with a focus on improv- the field. Areas covered: cognitive psychology,
perception, models of judgment and choice, ing students' organizational change skills. Ex- behavioral decision making, group process
decision aids, and problem structuring techni- amines the socialization processes students and performance, and organizational culture
ques. experienced while in the field and their at- and adaptation. Emphasizes use of behavioral
J. S. Carroll tempts to exercise leadership within various or- science concepts for stimulating new and useganizational cultures. Class format includes ful behavioral science research. Primarily for
15.313 Teams in Organizations lectures, discussions, case presentations, and doctoral candidates in the Sloan School of
small-group activities exploring internship- Management.
Prereq.: 15.301 or 15.310 or 15.311 or related issues. Individuals and teams submit D. L. Ancona
permission of instructor written analyses of aspects of the students'
G (Spring) LFM experiences. Restricted to LFM Fellows. 15.342J Organizations and Environments
3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit Information: J. S. Carroll.
(Same subject as 11.258J)
Teams are currently in vogue; we see them apPrereq.: Permission of instructor
pearing at all levels of management for a wide 15.318 Leadership and Change in
G (Spring)
variety of tasks. Unfortunately, many teams Organizations
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
fail. Subject focuses on the skills and perspecPrereq.: 15.311 or 15.315 or 15.322 or permistives necessary to make students better Examines theory and research on the relationsion of instructor
leaders, members, and designers of teams. ship of organizations to each other and to their
G (Spring)
Through lectures, discussion, roleplays, economic, political, and social environments.
3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
videotaping, group exercises, and written as- Classic and contemporary approaches to comCan be repeated for credit
signments, students learn not only the con- plex social systems, the dynamics of inertia
cepts but also how to improve their own Examines leadership and its role in the change and change, the role of legitimacy, and the
communication and group membership skills. process. Students learn more about them- production of change as an intended or uninTopics include negotiation, team decision selves as leaders, the concept of leadership tended consequence. Considers the relative
making, meeting management, and team from various theoretical perspectives, and roles of voluntarism and determinism in the
rewards. leadership in today's organizations. Includes pursuit of organizational agendas and in the
D. G. Ancona lectures, discussions, guest speakers, ex- shaping of organizational environments, for experiential exercises, field trips, and projects. ample, with respect to changing employment
15.314 Power and Culture in Organizations_ Grades are based on short papers written relationships and environmentalism. Primarily
throughout the term. for doctoral students.
Prereq.: 15.301 or 15.310 or 15.311 or D. G. Ancona, J. S. Carroll M. A. Scully
permission of instructor
G (Spring)
15.322 Organizational Psychology and 15.343 Managing Transformations in Work,
3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Sociology Organizations, and Society
Examines the determinants of political and cul- (New)
Prereq.: Permission of instructor
tural dynamics in organizations and their efG (Fall) Prereq.: Permission of instructor
fects on both corporate strategies and the
3-0-6 [P/D/F] H-LEVEL Grad Credit G (Fall, Spring)
career prospects of individual managers.
3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Provides students with the concepts and tools Analyzes - through lectures, discussions, and
necessary for diagnosing the rules of the class exercises - the human processes under- Managerial issues addressed are associated
game and the sources of power in organiza- lying organizational behavior. Restricted to with changes and innovations occurring at
tions. Special emphasis on applying the Sloan Fellows. three levels of organizational activity: (1) inframeworks and tactics studied in the design L. Bailyn novations in work organization, employee
of action plans for organizational and strategic voice, and dispute resolution at the workplace;
change. 15.328 Special Seminar in Organization (2) alternative compensation systems, goverInformation: J. Van Maanen. Studies nance structures, ownership arrangements,
and leadership at the strategic level; and (3)
15.315 Planning and Managing Change Prereq.: Permission of instructor relations with different groups in society. Guest
G (Fall, Spring) speakers and field research projects are
Prereq.: One subject in organizational Units arranged H-LEVEL Grad Credit prominently featured.
psychology and permission of instructor Can be repeated for credit M. A. Scully, T. A. Kochan
G (Fall)
15.329 Special Seminar in Organization
3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Studies
Basic models and tools used to analyze any
Prereq.: Permission of instructor
change problem in human systems. ApplicaG (Fall, Spring)
tion of these models and tools to actual
Units arranged H-LEVEL Grad Credit
change projects chosen by members of the
Can be repeated for credit
class, to be completed during the subject.
Group as well as individual projects, and week- Opportunity for group study by graduate stuly papers on progress. Models and tools drawn dents on current topics related to organization
from organization development theory. Primari- studies not otherwise included in curriculum.
ly for Master's students, Sloan Fellows, and Information: J. S. Carroll.
Management of Technology students.
E. H. Schein
440 Chapter Vill
