School of Engineering
16.861 Engineering Systems Analysis 16.872 Aerospace Design Project
Prereq.: Permission of instructor Prereq.: 16.870, 16.871
G (Fall) G (Spring)
3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit 1-0-2 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Engineering School-Wide Elective Subject. Restricted to Master of Engineering students.
Description given at end of this chapter in Provides a supervisory framework for the
SWE section on page 562. M.Eng. Design Project and Thesis. Multi-disR. de Neuville, J. P. Clark, F. Field ciplinary student teams are structured to focus
on design projects recommended by industry
16.862 Engineering Risk-Benefit and faculty. Projects address aircraft,
Analysis spacecraft, or aerospace product subsystems.
Student-prepared design review presentations
Prereq.: 18.02 scheduled at several points during the Spring
G (Spring) semester.
3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit C. W. Boppe
Engineering School-Wide Elective Subject.
Description given at end of this chapter in 16.89 Space Systems Engineering
SWE section on page 562. Prereq.: Permission of instructor
A. R. Odon, A. W. Drake, G. Apostolakis G (Spring)
4-0-8 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
16.870 Aerospace Product Design
Subject defines what a systems engineer
(Revised Units)
does, and reviews the unifying concepts which
Prereq.: Permission of department are applicable across many disciplines. ExG (Fall) amples drawn from major national programs
3-1-8 H-LEVEL Grad Credit such as the development of ballistic missiles,
Systems engineering technical and manage- Apollo, the Shuttle, Space Station Freedom,
ment elements used to address the unique and Patriot. Principles of good practice are
complexity of aerospace products. Require- developed and applied to current national
ments analysis, functional analysis, and design space programs, including the National
trade techniques form the basis for integrated Aerospace Plane, the Space Exploration Initiaproduct-process development best practices. tive, and the Mission to Planet Earth. Class
Project cost and technical control methods ad- specifies and designs a hypothetical satellite.
dressed include fault tree analysis, risk D. E. Hastings
management, and network analysis. Subject
material integrated with special event aircraft,
spacecraft, and systems seminars as well as
case studies prepared by industry and government speakers. Other Graduate Subjects
C. W. Boppe
16.871 Aerospace Product Design Tools 16.ThG Graduate Thesis
Prereq.: 16.870 Prereq.:
G (IAP)
1-0-2 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Computer-based tools that support the design
and development of complex aerospace
products are implemented as a basis for
modeling that enhances understanding of principles learned in 16.870. Design Structure
Matrix optimization ensures improved process
information flows and reduced cycle time. Executable behavior diagrams or discrete event
simulators assess systems characteristics and
design problems prior to making hardware and
software decisions. Stereolithography
generates preliminary manufactured parts as
well as masters and patterns for castings,
EDM, and vacuum forming using CAD/CAM
solids models.
C. W. Boppe
-
16.90 Introduction to Computational
Mechanics
Prereq.: 18.03
G (Fall)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
An introductory subject in computational
mechanics serving as a prerequisite for advanced computational fluids, structures, and
propulsion subjects. Includes discretization
methods (finite difference and finite element),
solution methods for elliptic equations (direct
and iterative) and initial value problems (explicit and implicit). Concepts of accuracy, consistency, stability, convergence, dissipation,
and dispersion introduced. Examples selected
from simple fluids, structures, heat, and mass
transfer model problems (one- and two-dimensional). Emphasis is on mathematical numerical analysis. Computer assignments requiring
programming.
J. Peraire
16.951 Entrepreneurship
Prereq.:
G (Fall, Spring, Summer)
Units arranged H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit
Program of graduate research, leading to an
S.M., M.Eng., E.A.A., Ph.D., or Sc.D. thesis; to
be arranged by the student with an appropriate
MIT faculty member, who is then thesis supervisor. The M.Eng. thesis is restricted to students in the M.Eng. program. Co-registration
with 16.872 is required in the Spring Term.
D. E. Hastings
-
G (Spring)
4-0-5
Engineering School-Wide Elective Subject.
Description given at end of this chapter in
SWE section on page 562.
T. G. Gutowski
16.952 Management Topics in Engineering
Prereq.: -
G (Spring)
2-0-4
Directed toward the student whose objective is
a career in engineering leading to management. Provides opportunities to examine topics
relating to the conduct of engineering activities
within a total management environment. Interfaces between engineering and other company functions, such as marketing, finance,
manufacturing, quality, explored with emphasis on the management process. Special
attention given to the role of technical staff in
the acquisition of new business and longrange planning. Seminar format based on current industrial practice.
J. Yamron
16.954J Research Ethics
(Same subject as 2.953J, TPP.41J)
Prereq.: -
G (Spring)
3-0-3
See description under subject 2.953J.
C. Whitbeck
16.97 Advanced Engineering Internship
Prereq.: 16.67
G (Fall, Spring, Summer)
0-6-0 [P/D/F]
Can be repeated for credit
A consecutive seven-month period of work experience as part of the Engineering Internship
Program. Students register for this subject in
two terms, receiving the grade "J" for the first
registration. Limited to students registered in
Course XVI-C who have been admitted to the
Graduate School.
/. A. Waitz
462 Chapter Vill
