Sloan School of Management
15.939 Strategic Options and Information Special Studies
Technology
Prereq.: 15.930 or 15.931
15.UR Undergraduate Research in
G (Fall) Management
Units arranged H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Prereq.:
The twin forces of a global business environment that is turbulent and likely to remain so,
and shifting customer ideas of value, are putting many organizations under real pressure.
At the same time, information technology is
rapidly changing. This, in turn, can change
how and where work gets done and which organizational forms will be most effective. Subject explores these issues and suggests ways
of thinking about what organizational forms are
most likely to emerge over the next decades.
M. S. Scott Morton
15.940 Environment and Product/Process
Strategy
Prereq.: 15.010 or 15.011 or equivalent
G (Spring)
2-0-4 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Examines the challenges and opportunities
faced by firms with environmentally sensitive
products and problematic internal process technologies. Cases and readings cover the interaction of market structure, corporate strategy
and management practice as they respond to
evolving systems of environmental regulation,
concepts of extended producer responsibility,
and informal means of influence by suppliers, customers, and advocacy groups.
H. D. Jacoby
15.941J Managing the Real Estate
Company
(Same subject as 11.430J)
Prereq.: 11.431J or 15.415 or 15.412
G (Spring)
4-0-8 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Focuses on management abilities - to design
innovative strategies and organizations, to
motivate, to negotiate, and to create and sustain learning environments - which are crucial
for success. Topics include: globalization and
strategic alliances, strategic planning, industry
and organization restructuring, organization
design and learning, managing organization
change, quality and asset management, international management, international computer
networks and implementation of information
technology, and ethics. Students are required
to participate in field research projects.
G. Schuck, S. A. Lambert
-
U (Fall, lAP, Spring, Summer)
Units arranged [P/D/F]
Can be repeated for credit
15.URG Undergraduate Studies in
Management
Prereq.: - U (Fall, IAP, Spring, Summer)
Units arranged
Can be repeated for credit
Participation in the work of a research group
which includes such activities as independent
study of the literature, direct involvement in the
group's research (commensurate with the
student's skills and preparation), or project
work under an individual faculty member possibly extending over more than one term. Admission by arrangement with individual faculty
member. Requires written project report. Students wanting a letter grade should register
under 15.URG.
J. S. Carroll
15.950 Special Studies in Management
(New)
Prereq.: - U (Fall, IAP, Spring, Summer)
Units arranged [P/D/F
15.951 Special Studies in Management
Prereq.: -
U (Fall, IAP, Spring, Summer)
Units arranged
Can be repeated for credit
Special tutorial arrangement with a faculty
member for guided reading, research,
laboratory, or teaching experience.
J. A. Meldman
15.952-15.959 Special Seminars in
Management
Prereq.: -
15.960 Special Studies in Management
(New)
Prereq.: Permission of instructor
G (Fall, IAP, Spring, Summer)
Units arranged [P/D/F] H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit
15.961 Special Studies in Management
Prereq.: Permission of instructor
G (Fall, IAP Spring, Summer)
Units arranged H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit
For graduate students who desire to do advanced work or to carry out some special investigation of a management problem not
specifically covered elsewhere and not qualifying as a thesis. Readings, conferences,
laboratory and fieldwork, and reports.
Consult Sloan Educational Services.
15.962-15.971 Special Seminars in
Management
Prereq.: Permission of instructor
G (Fall, IAP, Spring)
Units arranged H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit
15.972-15.976 Special Seminars in
Management
Prereq.: Permission of instructor
G (Fall, IAP, Spring)
Units arranged [P/D/F] H-LEVEL Grad Credit Can be repeated for credit
Opportunity for group study by graduate students on current topics related to managemenf
not otherwise included in curriculum.
Consult Sloan Educational Services.
15.978 Seminar in Management I
Prereq.: 15.511
G (Fall)
3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Provides students opportunities to meet senior
executives of private and public institutions,
and to discuss key management issues from
the perspective of top management. Students
prepare detailed briefings identifying and
U (Fall, IAP, Spring) analyzing important management issues
Units arranged facing these organizations. Seminar concludes
Can be repeated for credit with a one-week field trip to southern Connecticut and New York City. Restricted to Sloan
Opportunity for group study by undergraduate Fellows.
students on current topics related to manage- S. C. Lowance
ment not otherwise included in curriculum.
15.952 is taught P/D/F.
15.979 Seminar in Management 11
Consult Undergraduate Program Headquarters. Prereq.: 15.978
G (Spring)
3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Continuation of subject 15.978 on the identification and analysis of important management issues. Students prepare briefings and
meet with senior government and international
leaders during field trips to Washington and a
selected international area. Restricted to Sloan
Fellows.
S. C. Lowance
452 Chapter Vill
