Department of Aeronautics and Astronautics Course 16
Flight Transportation
16.72 Air Traffic Control
Prereq.: Permission of instructor
G (Fall)
3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Introduces the various aspects of present and
future Air Traffic Control systems. Descriptions
of the present system: systems-analysis approach to problems of capacity and safety; surveillance, including NAS and ARTS; navigation
subsystem technology; aircraft guidance and
control; communications; collision avoidance
systems; sequencing and spacing in terminal
areas; future directions and development; critical discussion of past proposals and of probable future problem areas. Requires term
paper.
R. J. Hansman
16.73J Seminar in Air Transportation
Analysis and Planning
(Same subject as 1.233J)
Prereq.: -
G (Fall)
1-0-5
A review of current issues facing the airline industry in operational, economic, financial,
regulatory, and institutional areas. Seminars
are presented on alternate weeks by leading
speakers from airlines, aircraft manufacturers,
major airports, regulatory agencies, and national and international aviation organizations.
Preparatory lectures precede each seminar.
Opportunity for students to conduct studies on
particular topics, with readings guided by staff.
Term paper required.
A. R. Odoni, P. P. Belobaba
16.74 Air Transportation Economics
Prereq.: -
16.76J Logistical and Transportation 16.82 Flight Vehicle Engineering
Planning Methods
Prereq.: Permission of department
(Same subject as 1.203J, 6.281J, 11.526J, U (Spring)
13.665J, 15.073J) 2-3-7
Prereq.: 6.431, 15.075
Design of an atmospheric flight vehicle to satis- G (Fall)
fy stated performance, stability, and control re- 3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
quirements. Emphasizes individual initiative,
See description under subject 1.203J. application of fundamental principles, and the
A. R. Odoni, A. 1. Bamett, R. C. Larson compromises inherent in the engineering
design process. Enrollment restricted to
16.77 Flight Transportation Operations seniors in Course XVI who have satisfactorily
Analysis completed all other Departmental requirements for the S.B. degree, or by permission of
Prereq.: 15.081J instructor.
G (Spring) M. Drela, R. J. Hansman
3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Studies application of linear programming and 16.83 Space Systems Engineering
network flow theory to operational problems in
Prereq.: Permission of department
flight transportation systems. Reviews graph
U (Spring)
theory. Network flow theory. Integer program-
4-1-7
ming and branch and bound methods.
Dynamic programming. Reviews implementa- Design of a complete space system, including
tion of computerized mathematical program- systems analysis, trajectory analysis, entry
ming systems. Applies the theory to dynamics, propulsion and power systems,
scheduling, aircraft and crew routing, timetable structural design, avionics, thermal and enoptimization, passenger traffic flow, flight plan- vironmental control, human factors, support
ning, etc. Students use computer to solve systems, weight and cost estimates. Students
large-scale problems and for term project. participate in teams, each responsible for an inStaff tegrated vehicle design, providing experience
in project organization and interaction between
16.781J Planning and Design of Airport disciplines. Enrollment is restricted to seniors
Systems in Course XVI who have satisfactorily completed all other Departmental requirements for
(Same subject as 1.231J) the S.B. degree, or by permission of instructor.
Prereq.: Permission of instructor D. E. Hastings
Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: G (Spring)
16.840 Real-Time Systems for Aerospace
3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Vehicles
See description under subject 1.231 J.
Prereq.: 16.060, 6.041
A. R. Odoni, R. de Neutvlie
G (Spring)
3-0-9
Systems engineering concepts and methods
G (Fall) for aircraft and spacecraft avionics and flight
3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit Aeronautical and Astronautical controls. System architectures and interconnection approaches for critical applications.
Introduces fundamental concepts for the Systems Real-time computer systems, software
economic analysis of airline systems. Con- development, and communication buses and
trasts basic models of the operation of air networks. Analysis of redundant systems with
transport markets with neoclassical 16.800J Aerospace Economics examples from modern aircraft and spacecraft
microeconomic models. Defines market sys- (Same subject as 14.25J) systems. Probabilistic methods and modeling
tems for air transport service, and develops a Prereq.: 14.01 for synthesis and evaluation of system architectheory for pricing, demand, costs, and supply U (Fall) tures including covariance analysis, hypothesis
for regulated and unregulated, domestic and in- 3-0-9 HASS testing, and Markov models.
ternational markets. Presents market models J. J. Deyst
for equilibria in isolated markets and over a net- Applies basic microeconomic theory to
work of markets. aerospace industries and markets, including
P. P. Belobaba aircraft manufacturing, air transportation sys- 16.851 Satellite Engineering
tems, and commercial space ventures. Prereq.: Permission of instructor
16.75 Airline Management Focuses on industry structure and firm be- Acad Year 1996-97: G (Fall)
havior, measures of concentration, regulation, Acad Year 1997-98: Not offered
Prereq.: 16.74 and government subsidy issues, as well as 3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
G (Spring) cost/benefit analysis. Specific topics include
3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit competition among aircraft manufacturers, im- Fundamentals of satellite engineering design.
pacts of airline deregulation, and evaluation of Studies orbital environment. Analyzes
Overview of airline management problems large-scale space projects. problems of station keeping, attitude control,
focusing on current issues. Development of P. P. Belobaba communications, power generation, structural
planning models and data analysis tools, with design, thermal balance, and subsystem inemphasis on the interactions between diverse tegration. Considers trade-offs among weight,
components of airline operations, including efficiency, cost, and reliability. Discusses
fleet planning, demand forecasting, overbook- choice of design parameters, such as size,
ing, yield management, scheduling, and route weight, power levels, temperature limits, frenetwork design. Students participate in a com- quency, bandwidth. Examples taken from curpetitive airline management simulation game
rent satellite systems.
as part of the subject requirements. W. M. Hollister
P. P. Belobaba
Descriptions of Subjects 461
