Sloan School of Management
15.577 Software Engineering 15.582J Information and Communications:
Management Technology and Policy
Prereq.: Permission of instructor (Same subject as TPP.71J)
Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered Prereq.: Permission of instructor
Acad Year 1997-98: G (Fall) G (Spring)
3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit 3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Focuses on managing and improving the See description under subject TPP.71J.
delivery of software in organizations, especial- L. McKnight
ly the management of projects that have been
described as "programming-in-the-large." 15.599 Workshop in Information Technology
Through case studies, students are exposed
to the tools and techniques used on commer- Prereq.: Permission of instructor
cial systems, and present research results on G (Fall, Spring)
the state of the art in how best to manage Units arranged
these projects. Subject places particular em- Can be repeated for credit
phasis on measurement tools for effective Presentations by faculty, doctoral students,
managerial planning and control. and guest speakers of ongoing research relatInformation: S. E. Madnick. ing to current issues in information technology,
as well as discussions of key research papers
15.578 Communications and Connectivity in the field. Specific topics determined by the
Among Information Systems interest of participants and by new and important directions in information technology. BackPrereq.: 15.561 or equivalent
ground readings and active participation by
G (Spring)
students expected. Primarily for doctoral stu-
3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
dents.
Explores critical issues of communications and E. Brynjolfsson
connectivity among information systems from
strategic, organizational, and technical
perspectives. Strategic connectivity: competitive forces, interlinked value chains, motivating
Law strategic alliances. Physical connectivity:
software, hardware, protocols of local-area
and wide-area communications networks. Logical connectivity: distributed databases, object- 15.601 The American Legal System
oriented systems, semantic reconciliation. (Subject meets with 15.611)
Organizational connectivity: loosely coupled or- Prereq.: 14.01 or 14.02 or equivalent
ganizations, development of standards. U (Fall)
S. E. Madnick 3-0-6 HASS
15.611 The American Legal System
15.579-15.580 Special Seminar in
Information Technology (Subject meets with 15.601)
Prereq.: 14.01 or 14.02 or equivalent
Prereq.: 15.561 or 15.564
G (Fall)
G (Fall, Spring)
3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Units arranged H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit General intensive introduction to law and the
American legal system. Analyzes components
Opportunity for group study by graduate stuand operation of the legal process in context of
dents on current topics related to information
specific legal problems. Examines judicial
technology not otherwise included in cur- reasoning and development of legal doctrine.
riculum. Topics: torts, contracts, criminal and constituS. E. Madnick, T. W. Malone
tional law, trial procedure and evidence, administrative law, scope of the judicial process,
15.581 Information Systems and Law
and the relationships between state and
Prereq.: Permission of instructor Federal law. Extensive reading of case law.
Acad Year 1996-97: G (Spring) Participation in class discussion required. No
Acad Year 1997-98: Not offered listeners.
3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit J. A. Meldman
Examines interlocking technological and legal 15.615 The Manager's Legal Function
issues that arise in the operation of computerbased information systems in society. Em- Prereq.:
phasizes, in class discussions and in term
projects, interdisciplinary definition, analysis,
and solution of specific problems. Continuing
effort toward improving and integrating technical, social, and legal concepts of information.
Topics: protection of personal privacy,
proprietary rights in software, computer crime,
computer ethics. No listeners. Alternate years.
J. A. Meldman
-
15.635 Law and International Business
Prereq.:
G (Fall, Spring)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Provides a basic understanding of legal issues
that corporations meet during their existence.
Follows one firm throughout its life - from
birth to bankruptcy, first as a breakaway from
an established high-tech firm, then proceeding
through initial funding efforts, establishment of
its capital and corporate structure, and through
problems in labor, trade secrets, contracts and
antitrust, product liability, and resolution of
transnational and domestic business disputes.
J. D. Nyhart
-
G (Spring)
3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
A management-oriented understanding of international business from a legal perspective. Emphasis on East Asia, Europe, and the US. The
international, regional, and national law
frameworks of: trade regulation and import
competition; transnational contracts and corporations; responsibility to employees, consumers and the environment; regulation of
competition and collaboration: intellectual
property and licensing; and law-sensitive transactions such as joint R&D, M&A, financial services, and privatization.
J. Akula
15.645 Government and the Management of
Technology
Prereq.: -
G (Spring)
3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
The changing role of government in shaping
and directing the management of technology
in the civilian sector of the economy. Principal
themes: rationales, processes, and
mechanisms of government involvement;
promotion and regulation of technological
development and use by government; and industrial policy in the US and other countries. Illustrative case studies: protection of individual
property, R&D policy, environmental regulation, administrative law.
J. D. Nyhart
15.647-15.649 Special Seminar in Law
Prereq.: -
G (Fall, Spring)
Units arranged H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit
Opportunity for group study by graduate students on current topics related to law not otherwise included in curriculum.
J. D. Nyhart
15.655J Law, Technology, and Public
Policy
(Same subject as TPP.32J)
Prereq.: -
G (Spring)
3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
See description under subject TPP.32J.
N. A. Ashford, C. C. Caldart
15.656J Technology, Law, and the Working
Environment
(Same subject as 10.805J, TPP.35J)
Prereq.: -
Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: G (Fall)
3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
See description under subject 10.805J.
N. A. Ashford, C. C. Caldart
446 Chapter Vill
