Foreign Languages and Literatures Course 21F
Advanced Subjects in Literature and
Culture
Students are required to take at least one
intermediate subject before enrolling in advanced subjects. Otherwise they must obtain permission of the instructor.
21F.336 Introduction to the French
Short Story
Prereq.: One intermediate French subject or
equivalent
Acad Year 1996-97: U (Spring)
Acad Year 1997-98: Not offered
3-0-9 HASS
Short stories by major French authors. Special
attention paid to the theme of the fantastic and
the supernatural. Works by Perrault, Barbey
d'Aurevilly, Villers de I'Isle-Adam, Maupassant,
Nelly Kaplan, and Michel Tournier.
M. Roberts
21 F.338 The French Novel in the Nineteenth
Century
Prereq.: One intermediate French subject or
equivalent
Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: U (Spring)
3-0-9 HASS
The golden age of the French novel. Emphasizes Romanticism, Realism, and
Naturalism in Balzac, Stendhal, Sand,
Flaubert, and Zola. Themes include the interaction of love, money, and politics in the newly
developed bourgeois society of nineteenth-century France. Devotes attention to narrative
techniques, representations of reality, and the
influence of history and science.
Consult 1. de Courtivron.
21 F.340 The French Novel in the Twentieth
Century
Prereq.: One intermediate French subject or
equivalent
Acad Year 1996-97: U (Spring)
Acad Year 1997-98: Not offered
3-0-9 HASS
Reading and discussion of major twentiethcentury French novels. Emphasis on literary
techniques as well as historical and cultural
contexts. Works by writers such as Genet,
Gide, Yourcenar, Proust, Colette, and Camus.
/. de Courtivron
21F.342 Topics in French Film
Prereq.: -
21F.344 From Renaissance to Revolution:
The French Humanist Tradition in Literature
Prereq.: One intermediate French subject or
equivalent
Acad Year 1996-97: U (Fall)
Acad Year 1997-98: Not offered
3-0-9 HASS
Readings in major writers of the Renaissance
(Rabelais, Montaigne, Ronsard), the Neo-Classic Period (Corneille, Racine, Moliere, La Fontaine), and the Enlightenment (Rousseau,
Prevost, Voltaire, Beaumarchais). Places texts
in cultural and intellectural contexts, with emphasis on how the Renaissance concept of bestowing special value on human individuality
evolved over a period of three centuries.
E. B. Turk
21 F.399 Intensive French Language and
Culture: Preparing to Work in France
Prereq.: French IV or equivalent
U (IAP)
4-0-8 HASS
Prepares students to express themselves
fluently and to function in a French work environment in the field of their choice. Main components are: a general review of grammar and
communication skills; a series of lectures and
presentations on French science and technology; advanced independent study of French
language using the latest interactive resources, with an emphasis on science and technology; and an introduction to historical and
contemporary aspects of French cultural life.
Priority given to seniors and graduates.
S. Waryn
For literature subjects on France offered in
English, see 21F.850 through 21F.852.
German
The indication of prerequisites for specific
German offerings does not apply to students who have already accomplished the
equivalent work. For further placement advice, consult one of the field advisors in
German.
Fundamental Language Subjects
21 F.401 German I Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: U (Spring) Prereq.:
4-0-8 HASS
Can be repeated for credit
Close study of a topic that relates to the art
and history of the French cinema and that
focuses on a specific director, movement,
theme, critical or theoretical issue, analytic approach, etc. Films shown with English subtitles. For 1995-96 the topic is Marcel Carn6
and Jean Renoir: two major directors, two
cinematic visions. Conducted in English.
E. B. Turk
-
21 F.402 German I
Prereq.: German I
U (Fall, Spring)
4-0-8 HASS
Continued practice in pronunciation and intonation. Vocabulary building, review and extension of basic grammar. Practice in writing short
essays. Reading of short literary texts. Introduces the history and culture of Germanspeaking countries.
E. Crocker, M. Totten
21 F.403 German IlIl
Prereq.: German 11
U (Fall, Spring)
4-0-8 HASS-D Language Option
Reading of drama, prose, and poetry by such
major twentieth-century authors as
D(jrrenmatt, B611, Borchert, and others. Discussions and compositions based on these works, media selections, and audio/videotapes on
contemporary issues in the German-speaking
world link the learning of language and that of
culture. Review of German grammar and
development of vocabulary-building strategies
to improve self-expression. Recommended for
students with two years of high school German.
K. Fendt
21F.404 German IV
Prereq.: German III
U (Fall, Spring)
4-0-8 HASS-D Language Option
Further deepening of an understanding of German language and culture. Interpretation of
literary texts (Brothers Grimm, Frisch, Brecht),
discussion of cultural topics, development of
oral communicative competence in practical
everyday situations.
E. Crocker, M. Totten
Intermediate and Advanced Subjects
in Language, Literature, and Culture
21F.410 Speaking and Writing: German in
Technology and Business
(Revised Content)
Prereq.: German IV or equivalent
U (Spring)
4-0-8 HASS
Systematic training in speaking and writing
skills to improve fluency and style with emphasis on communicative strategies. Discussion and analysis of newspaper and magazine
articles, audio and visual materials, and
U (Fall, IAP, Spring) modern expository prose. Students select a
4-0-8 HASS topic of their choice and present the final
projects to the class.
Basic principles of the German language. Fun- B. Widdig
damentals of pronunciation, intonation, and
grammar. Acquisition of basic vocabulary.
Laboratory exercises to further communicative
competence.
M. Totten, E. Crocker
Descriptions of Subjects 493
