Department of Political Science Course 17
17.614J Russian Science, Technology, and
Society
(Subject meets with STS.021, STS.103J)
Prereq.: -
Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: G (Fall)
3-0-9
See description under subject STS.021.
L. R. Graham
Models and Methods
17.801 Political Science Laboratory
Prereq.: -
U (Fall)
3-5-4 Institute LAB
Introduces students to the conduct of political
research using quantitative methodologies.
The methods are examined in the context of
specific political research activities like public
opinion surveys, voting behavior, Congressional behavior, comparisons of political
processes in different countries, and the
evaluation of public policies. Students participate in joint class projects and conduct individual projects. May not count toward HASS
Requirement.
C. Stewart
17.805 Theory of Collective Choice:
Institutions and Positive Political Theory
(Subject meets with 17.806J, 14.296J)
Prereq.: -
U (Spring)
3-0-9 HASS
17.806J Theory of Collective Choice:
Institutions and Positive Political Theory
(Subject meets with 14.296J, 17.805)
Prereq.: -
17.808J Theory of Collective Choice:
Empirical Tests
(Same subject as 14.295J)
Prereq.: 17.806J
Acad Year 1996-97: G (Spring)
Acad Year 1997-98: Not offered
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Focuses on the relationship between the behavioral models developed by formal theorists
and the statistical models used in empirical estimation. The main questions are: How do researchers make the link between theory and
the data? How do they generate and estimate
statistical models that allow careful testing of
the behavioral models? What constitutes a
good 'lest" of a model? These questions
studied through reading and discussion of articles that combine both empirical and theoretical analysis.
S. Ansolabehere
17.816 Field Research Methods in
Comparative Politics and Political
Development
Prereq.: Permission of instructor
G (Fall)
2-2-8 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Introduces a variety of approaches and
methods for conducting research in Europe
and in developing countries, including elite interviewing, participant observation, case
studies, electoral analysis, cross-cultural survey research, and documentary research. Attention to conceptual, practical, and ethical
issues of conducting research abroad, e.g.,
the role of language in social research, the
limits and uses of official sources, and ethical
responsibilities of social scientists. Not open to
first-year graduate students.
M. Weiner
17.842 Quantitative Research in Political
Science and Public Policy
Prereq.:
G (Spring)
3-0-9
Examines political institutions from a rational
choice perspective. The now burgeoning rational choice literature on legislatures,
bureaucracies, courts, and elections constitutes the chief focus. Some focus on institutions from a comparative and/or international
perspective. Graduate students are expected
to pursue the subject in greater depth through
reading and individual research.
J. M. Snyder, Jr.
-
17.844 Categories and Concepts in Political
Science
Prereq.:
G (Fall)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
An introduction to the application of elementary statistics to political analysis. A basic
literacy subject, teaching the student how to
read and interpret the quantitative literature in
various subfields of political science and public
policy. Students develop elementary statistical
computation skills and learn to use a statistical
computing package.
J. M. Snyder, Jr., S. Ansolabehere
-
Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: G (Spring)
3-0-9
Examines competing theoretical perspectives
on the formation, function, use, and abuse of
concepts in political science and the social
sciences more generally. Topics include classical, radial, and family resemblance categories,
neologism, contested concepts, metaphor,
translation, and conceptual stretching and
change. Particular concepts to be analyzed include freedom, justice, power, and democracy.
Students also analyze the structure of concepts of their choosing.
F. Schaffer
17.846 Multivariate Political Analysis
Prereq.: 17.801 or 17.842 or equivalent
G (Spring)
2-2-8 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Focus on multivariate data analysis procedures, emphasizing regression. Considers
model specification, autocorrelation, instrumental variables, and causal modelling. Students
must have taken at least one previous subject
in statistics. Open to qualified undergraduates.
S. Ansolabehere
General Subjects
17.UR Undergraduate Research
Prereq.: -
U (Fall, Spring)
Units arranged [P/D/F]
Can be repeated for credit
17.URG Undergraduate Research
Prereq.: -
U (Fall, Spring)
Units arranged
Can be repeated for credit
Undergraduate research opportunities in Political Science in theoretical and applied research. For further information, contact the
Departmental Coordinator.
R. J. Samuels
Descriptions of Subjects 473
