School of Humanities and Social Science
21F.715 Introduction to Spanish Culture Advanced Subjects in Literature and 21 F.730 Twentieth-Century Hispanic
Culture American Literature
Prereq.: Spanish IV or equivalent
Acad Year 1996-97: U (Spring) Prereq.: One intermediate subject in Spanish
Acad Year 1997-98: Not offered Students are required to have taken at least or equivalent
3-0-9 HASS one intermediate subject before enrolling in Acad Year 1996-97: U (Spring)
advanced subjects, or obtain permission of Acad Year 1997-98: Not offered
Studies the major social, political, and aesthe instructor. 3-0-9 HASS
thetic modes which have shaped Spanish
civilization. Coordinates the study of literature, Concentrates on the classics of this century,
film, art, and architecture with the historical 21 F.716 Introduction to Contemporary with a few surprises: Quiroga's and Borges'
evolution of Spain. Readings and discussion Hispanic Literature short stories, poetry by Vallejo and Neruda,
focus on such topics as: the coexistence of Teresa de la Parra's Las memorias de Mama
Prereq.: One intermediate subject in Spanish
Christians, Moors, and Jews, Imperial Spain, Blanca, Rulfo's Pedro Pciramo, Garcia
or equivalent
The First and Second Republics, and the con- Marquez's Cien alios de soledad, and more.
U (Fall)
temporary period as background for the emer- E. Garrels
3-0-9 HASS-D, Category 1
gence of distinctively Spanish literary and
artistic movements. Studies important twentieth-century texts from 21 F.736 The Short Story in Spain and
M. Resnick both Spain and Latin America that represent Hispanic America
the principal fictional genres - poetry, theatre,
short story, and the novel. Includes works by Prereq.: One intermediate subject in Spanish
Hernandez, Bombal, Lorca, Neruda, Vallejo, or equivalent
Machado, Unamuno, Garcia Marquez, Ferr6, Acad Year 1996-97: U (Fall)
Riera, and Aub. Acad Year 1997-98: Not offered
M. Resnick 3-0-9 HASS
Studies the evolution of the short story in
21F.718 Art and the Intelligentsia in Spain and Hispanic America from the sixteenth
Post-Colonial Hispanic America century to the present. Considers the short
(Revised Content) story as a genre with unique possibilities for expression. Some semesters students write their
Prereq.: One intermediate subject in Spanish
or equivalent own short stories in Spanish. Authors include
Borges, Cortazar, Quiroga, Cervantes, Maria
Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
de Zayas, Pardo Bazen, and numerous conAcad Year 1997-98: U (Fall)
temporary women writers.
3-0-9 HASS
E. Garrels
Looks at the evolving polemic, from Simon
Bolivar and the early nineteenth-century Wars 21 F.738 Literature and Social Conflict:
of Independence to the intelligentsia in Perspectives on Modern Spain
Hispanic America and what is its social function. When have the roles of artist, intellectual, Prereq.: One intermediate subject in Spanish
and political activist coincided? When have or equivalent
they diverged? How have these roles been Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
defined or complicated by social class, race, Acad Year 1997-98: U (Fall)
ethnicity, and gender? Spanish-language 3-0-9 HASS
novels, poetry, short stories, essays, tes- Considers how major literary texts illuminate
timonials, and films, including works by principal issues in the evolution of modern
Bolivar, Marti, Dario, Azuela, Guillen, Ar- Spanish society. Emphasizes the treatment of
guedas, Menchb, Garro, Cort zar, Paz, Gam- such major questions as the exile of liberals in
baro, Cuban filmmakers, Chicana poets, and 1820, the concept of progress, the place of
contemporary performance artists. religion, urbanization, rural conservatism and
E. Garrels
changing sex roles, and the Spanish Civil War.
Authors studied include Perez Gald6s, Pardo
21 F.729 Making the Other Speak: BazAn, Unamuno, Ortega y Gasset, Salinas,
Narratives From the Spanish Conquest of Lorca, La Pasionaria, and Falc6n.
the New World M. Resnick
Prereq.: One intermediate subject in Spanish,
or equivalent
Acad Year 1996-97: U (Spring)
Acad Year 1997-98: Not offered
3-0-9 HASS
How might New World peoples be thought to
"speak" in key stories of Spain's colonization of
America? How do individual and collective,
Old and New World views shape these
stories? Selections include: Columbus on the
Discovery; Cortes on his conquest of Mexico;
Sahagun's Indian informants on Mexico's fall;
Las Casas on the unlawfulness of Spain's expansionism; Cabeza de Vaca on shipwreck
and survival; Cieza, Garcilaso, and various Andean chroniclers on the conquest of Peru;
Ursua on Aguirre's search for El Dorado. Includes some cinematic versions. Students are
asked to reflect on the relationship among
storytelling, ideology, and historical truth.
N. Wey-G6mez
496 Chapter Vill
