School of Humanities and Social Science
21 F.820J New World Literature
(Same subject as 21 L.444J)
Prereq.: -
U (Spring)
3-0-9 HASS-D, Category 1
Studies in comparative patterns of development in the diverse American traditions of
literature, race, gender, and cultural identity.
Works from the Americas, as well as by
European writers responding to America.
N. Wey-Gomez, M. Fuller
21F.822J International Women's Voices
(Same subject as SP.431J)
Prereq.: -
U (Spring)
3-0-9 HASS-D, Category 1
Introduces students to a variety of fictional
works by contemporary women writers. The
subject's international perspective emphasizes
the extent to which each author's work reflects
her distinct cultural heritage and to what extent, if any, we can identify a female voice that
transcends national boundaries. A variety of interpretive perspectives, including sociohistorical, psychoanalytic, and feminist criticism will
be used to examine the texts. Authors read include: Mariama BA, Isabel Allende, Anita
Desai, Maxine Hong Kingston, Toni Morrison,
Doris Lessing, Alifa Riyaat, Yang Jiang, Nawal
AI-Saadawi, and Sawako Ariyoshi.
M. Resnick
21 F.823 Women's Voices: An International
Perspective
(New)
Prereq.: -
21F.828J Sex Roles in Fiction: Europe and
Latin America
(Same subject as SP.432J)
Prereq.:
G (Spring)
3-0-9
Introduces students to fictional works by contemporary women writers. The subject's international perspective emphasizes the extent to
which each author's work reflects her distinct
cultural heritage and to what extent, if any, we
can identify a female voice that transcends national boundaries. Interpretive perspectives, including sociohistorical, psychoanalytic, and
feminist criticism. Authors include Mariama Ba,
Isabel Allende, Hong Kingston, Toni Morrison,
Alifa Riyaat, Nawal Al-Saadawi, Yang Jiang,
Anita Desai and Sawako Ariyoshi. Graduate
students are expected to pursue the subject in
greater depth through reading and individual
projects.
M. Resnick
-
Acad Year 1996-97: U (Fall)
Acad Year 1997-98: Not offered
3-0-9 HASS
Examines the representation of sexual roles in
fiction. Studies works by European and Latin
American authors in their cultural and historical
contexts. Themes emphasized include bourgeois women, women rebels, and redefinition
of sex roles. Comparative analysis of works by
Laclos, Fontane, Molibre, Sor Juana Ines de la
Cruz, Zola, Lorca, Wolf, Wittig, Machado de
Assis, Colette, and Puig. Materials used include films by: Godard, Buhuel, Saura, M. v.
Trotta.
M. Resnick
Culture-Specific Subjects in Translation
21F.840 Introduction to Chinese Classic
Fiction
Prereq.: -
Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: U (Fall)
3-0-9 HASS
Traces the evolution of Chinese fiction from its
roots in the oral tradition through major novels
of the eighteenth century. This genre includes
historical, supernatural, detective, and love
stories. Attention paid to the art of the early
storytellers; Confucian, Taoist, and Buddhist
themes; the interpolation of poetry in narratives; the Literati writers; and other aspects of
culture reflected in the readings. Works read include Three Kingdoms, Monkey King, The
Dream of the Red Chamber, and others.
Y. Tai
21F.842 Chinese Drama Through the Ages
Prereq.: -
21 F.850J French Literature in Translation
(Same subject as 21 L.490J)
Prereq.:
Acad Year 1996-97: U (Fall)
Acad Year 1997-98: Not offered
3-0-9 HASS
An introduction to Chinese drama through
readings and videos. Students examine the
cultural heritage of the Chinese theatre from
the stylized traditional mode of the Yuan
Dynasty through the realistic plays of the twentieth century. The social and historical role of
the theatre in shaping Chinese ethical concerns is studied. Discussions focus on
dramaturgy, production techniques, and styles.
Attention paid to the similarities and differences between the Chinese and Western
theatres, and the interchange between the two.
Y. Tai
-
U (Spring)
3-0-9 HASS
Reading and analysis of landmark works of
French literature, from the neo-classical period
through the twentieth century, in English translation. Attention to intellectual and cultural contexts. Typically, writers include Racine,
Molibre, Voltaire, Beaumarchais, Balzac,
Flaubert, Baudelaire, Proust, Genet, lonesco,
Beckett, Duras, and Yourcenar.
E. B. Turk
21 F 851 The Avant-Garde in France
Prereq.: French IV
Acad Year 1996-97: U (Fall)
Acad Year 1997-98: Not offered
3-0-9 HASS
Focuses on avant-garde movements and their
relationship to dominant institutions and values
in twentieth-century France, including Surrealism, Situationalism, and other counter-cultures (the nouvelle vague, the nouveau roman,
post-structuralism). Topics include: sexual
politics of the avant-garde aesthetics; dissident
voices within avant-garde groups; avant-garde
aesthetics and mythologies in contemporary
mass culture; theories of the avant-garde and
debates about its alleged obsolescence. Conducted in English.
M. Roberts
21F.852 French Film Classics
Prereq.: -
U (Fall)
4-0-8 HASS
History and aesthetics of French cinema from
the advent of sound to the present day. Treats
films in the context of technical processes, the
art of narration, directorial style, role of the
scriptwriter, the development of schools and
movements, the impact of political events and
ideologies, and the relation between French
and other national cinemas. Directors studied
include Clair, Vigo, Carn6, Renoir, Clouzot,
Ophuls, Godard, Truffaut, Malle, and Akerman. The unifying theme in selection and
analysis of films is sex and society. Films
shown with English subtitles.
E. B. Turk
21 F.856 The German Cinema
Prereq.: -
Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: U (Spring)
4-0-8 HASS
Overview of German film since its beginnings.
Weekly screenings. Lectures and discussions
deal with technical and aesthetic as well as
socio-historical aspects. Students keep weekly
journals based on thorough analysis of films as
well as readings on social and historical background. Directors include Lang, Murnau,
Pabst, Schl6ndorff, Wenders, Herzog,
Fassbinder, Staudte, M. v. Trotta. Conducted
in English. Films shown with English subtitles.
B. Widdig
498 Chapter Vill
