Anthropology Course 21A
Course 21 Humanities
Anthropology (21 A)
Foreign Languages and Literatures (21 F)
History (21 H)
Literature (21 L)
Music and Theater Arts (21 M)
Program in Writing and
Humanistic Studies (21W)
To register for individual research or thesis
in a specific humanities section, see the
end of the section's subject listing below.
21.UR Research in Humanities
Prereq.: -
U (Fall, Spring)
Units arranged [P/D/FI
Can be repeated for credit
21.URG Research in Humanities
Prereq.: -
For degree requirements, see listing in
Chapter VI under the School of
Humanities and Social Science.
Anthropology
Consult Anthropology Headquarters, 20B-1 31,
for the most up-to-date information about
requirements and subject offerings.
The anthropology subjects described
below are grouped within five areas: Introductory, Social Anthropology, Technology
U (Fall, Spring) in Cultural Context, Culture History, and AdUnits arranged vanced Topics. Students are encouraged to
Can be repeated for credit take subjects from each of the first four
groups for a fuller overview of the field. Individual participation in an ongoing research
project. For students in the Undergraduate Research Opportunities Program.
Consult P. S. Khoury.
Introductory
21.ThT Humanities Pre-Thesis Tutorial
Prereq.: As specified for particular field 21A.100 Introduction to Anthropology
U (Fall, Spring)
Prereq.:
1-0-5
Can be repeated for credit
Definition of and early-stage work on thesis
project leading to 21 ThU Undergraduate
Thesis in Humanities. Taken during the first
term of the student's two-term commitment to
the thesis project. Student works closely with
an individual faculty tutor. Required for all students in Course XXI, and those doing XXI-E
and XXI-S degrees, for whom the thesis is a
degree requirement.
P. S. Khoury
21.ThU Undergraduate Thesis in Humanities
Prereq.: 21 ThT
U (Fall, Spring)
Units arranged
Can be repeated for credit
Completion of work on the senior major thesis
under supervision of a faculty tutor. Includes
oral presentation of thesis progress early in the
term, assembling and revising the final text,
and meeting at the close with a committee of
faculty evaluators to discuss the successes
and limitations of the project. Required for
most students in Course XXI and those doing
XXI-E and XXI-S degrees. (See degree requirements in specific fields.)
P. S. Khoury
-
21A.110 Seminar in Anthropological Method
and Theory
Prereq.: Major or minor in Anthropology, or
permission of instructor
Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: U (Spring)
3-0-9 HASS
Seminar focusing on core issues and approaches in anthropological theory and
method. Theoretical frameworks for the
analysis and integration of material from other
subjects in cultural anthropology.
Consult J. Howe.
21A.112 Tutorial for Majors and Minors in
Anthropology
Prereq.: Major or minor in Anthropology
U (Fall, Spring)
3-0-9 HASS
Reading and discussion subject. Each student
meets regularly with tutor to discuss readings.
Grounding in fundamentals of anthropology
and integration of other coursework in field.
Consult J. Howe.
U (Fall)
3-0-9 HASS-D, Category 4
What kinds of wisdom do other ways of life
offer our own? How do other perspectives on
the world challenge our assumptions about
Social Anthropology
life? These questions are addressed through
the four fields of anthropology: biological, cultural, and linguistic anthropology, and archaeol- 21A.211 Magic, Witchcraft, and the Spirit
ogy. We examine family and kinship, religion, World
economics, politics, survival of indigenous
groups, and Western influences from an Prereq.:
anthropological perspective to gain appreciation for cultural and ethnic diversity.
M. Diskin
21A.109 Understanding Culture
Prereq.: _
U (Fall)
3-0-9 HASS-D, Category 4
Students are introduced to anthropological
fieldwork and the concept of culture from readings, films, and their own research projects in
the Boston area. A "hands-on" approach to understanding cultural differences and what
produces them. Students discover the excitement and challenges of systematically observing human interaction and convincing others of
the accuracy of their findings.
J. Jackson
-
U (Fall)
3-0-9 HASS
Spiritual, magical, and "occult" aspects of
human behavior in anthropological and historical perspective: divination and other forms of
magic, ritual curing, trance, spirit possession,
sorcery, and accusations of witchcraft. Material
drawn from traditional non-western societies,
medieval and early modern Europe, and
colonial and contemporary North America.
J. Howe
21A.212 Myth, Ritual, and Symbolism
Prereq.: -
U (Spring)
3-0-6 HASS
How people make sense of their worlds symbolically through myth, ritual, metaphor, and
cosmology. The structure of symbols, the
natural and social elements they draw on, their
social use, and the messages they convey.
Students learn to record and analyze myth and
ritual.
Consult J. Howe.
Descriptions of Subjects 487
