Foreign Languages and Literatures Course 21F
21F.740 The New Spain: 1977-Present 21 F.748 History of the Spanish Language
Prereq.: One intermediate subject in Spanish Prereq.: Permission of instructor
or equivalent Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered Acad Year 1997-98: U (Spring)
Acad Year 1997-98: U (Spring) 3-0-9 HASS
3-0-9 HASS
Starts with the modern language and proceeds
Deals with the vast changes in Spanish social, to successively earlier stages. Includes
political, and cultural life that have taken place general concepts of language change; specific
since the death of Franco. New freedom from phonological, morphological, and syntactic
censorship; the re-emergence of strong move- changes in the history of Spanish; the place of
ments for regional autonomy: the Basque Spanish among Romance tongues; modern
region and Catalonia; the new cinema includ- dialects; reading of representative texts of earing Almoddvar and Saura; educational reforms lier periods. Discussion and readings in
instituted by the socialist government, as well English and Spanish. Spanish III or equivalent
as the fiction of Carme Riera and Terenci normally provides sufficient preparation.
Moix, are examined. Special emphasis placed J. W. Harris
on the emergence of mass media as a vehicle
for expression in Spain. Consideration given to
the changes wrought by Spain's acceptance
into the European Community. Material in- For Literature and Culture subjects taught
cludes magazines, newspapers, films, fiction in English on Spain and Latin America, see
and Amando de Miguel's Los Esparioles. 21F.810, 21F.812, 21F.820J, 21F.880,
M. Resnick 21 F.884J.
21 F.741 Theater and Society in the
Spanish-Speaking World
(Revised Content) Studies in International
Prereq.: One intermediate subject in Spanish, Literatures and Cultures
or equivalent
Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: U (Spring) Studies in International Literatures and Cul-
3-0-9 HASS tures make various modes of intercultural
discourse available in English. Those subHispanic theater and its performance from jects that deal with works from more than
Golden Age masterworks to twentieth-century one nation give students the opportunity to
experimental and political drama in Spain, do work in comparative studies. A sigLatin America, and the US. What has been the nificant number of subjects also allow stuplace of drama in various Hispanic societies? dents to study works from a single foreign
Includes major works such as Lope de Vega's country.
Fuenteovejuna, Calderon de la Barca's La
vida es sueifo, Valle-Inclin's Luces de
bohemia, Buero Vallejo's El tragaluz, Triana's
La noche de los asesinos, Benedetti's Pedro y Cross-Cultural Subjects in Translation
el capiten, Gambaro's Los slameses, and
Garcia Marquez's Diatriba de amor contra un 21F.810 Introduction to European and Latin
hombre sentado. Also includes film produc- American Fiction
tions. Conducted in Spanish.
N. Wey-Gomez Prereq.:
21 F.742 Cervantes and His Age
Prereq.: One intermediate subject in Spanish
or equivalent
Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: U (Fall)
3-0-9 HASS
Critics have long recognized Spain as the
birthplace of the novel and have seen in Don
Quijote de la Mancha the prototype for this
genre. Concentrates on Don Quijote but also
considers the author Cervantes as an outstanding example of the humanist in sixteenthcentury Spain and Europe. Attention to
Cervantes' humor and irony as well as his
ideas on religion, justice, love, language, and
artistic creation.
N. Wey-G6mez
-
21F.812 Christopher Columbus: Science
and Politics in the Age of Discovery
Prereq.:
Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: U (Spring)
3-0-9 HASS
Studies great works of European and Latin
American fiction. Attention to a variety of forms
including the picaresque, epistolary, realist,
naturalist, and magical realist fiction. Emphasizes ways in which the unique history of
each country shaped the imaginative responses of its writers. Authors read include Cervantes, Laclos, Goethe, Mann, Dostoevsky,
Flaubert, Zola, Unamuno, Wolf, Garcia
Merquez, and Allende.
M. Resnick
-
Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: U (Spring)
3-0-9 HASS
Studies the philosophical foundations of racial
prejudice, colonialism, and slavery in the Age
of Discovery. Focuses on the relationship between scientific systems of description and
classification and political theory in Early
Modern Europe. Topics include: the conception of the cosmos prior to Newton's mathematical refutation of Aristotle's geocentric
universe; the impact of these ideas in early
portrayals of Indians and their "place" in a new
imperial order; the idealized and demonic
stereotypes of Indians resulting from early
colonial contact in More's Utopia,
Shakespeare's The Tempest, etc. Class conducted in English.
N. Wey-Gomez
21F.814 Modernism and Its Discontents
Prereq.: -
Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: U (Fall)
3-0-9 HASS
Investigates the various reactions of writers, artists, philosophers, and filmmakers to the
process of social and cultural modernization
during the early twentieth century. Topics: the
city as text, the fascination with technology
and the machine, myth and modernity, avantgarde art movements, reactionary modernism,
redefinitions of sexuality. In 1997-98, subject
emphasizes German modernism. Readings by
Marx, Freua, Benjamin, D6blin, Hesse, Brecht,
JOnger; films by Lang, Murnau, Pabst; artistic
production of German expressionism, Neue
Sachlichkeit, Bauhaus. Taught in English.
B. Widdig
21 F.816 Alternative Cinema: Male
Same-Sex Desire in International Film
(New)
Prereq.: -
U (Spring)
2-2-8 HASS
Interpretation and analysis of works by international filmmakers who focus on male
homosexual desire. Primary attention given to
ways in which screen representations of samesex desire affect narrative form, cinematic
style, and human vision. Films studied in cultural and political contexts. Filmmakers include: Almodovar, Kenneth Anger, Gregg
Araki, Denys Arcand, Bertolucci, Antonia Byrd,
Fassbinder, Jean Genet, Todd Haynes, Derek
Jarman, Isaac Julien, Bruce La Bruce,
Takehiro Murata, Pasolini, Marlon Riggs,
Frank Ripploh, Gus Van Sant, Andre Tbchine,
Andy Warhol. Non-English-language films in
subtitled versions.
E. B. Turk
Descriptions of Subjects 497
