School of Humanities and Social Science
French
The indication of prerequisites for specific
French offerings does not apply to students who have already accomplished the
equivalent work. For further placement advice, consult with one of the field advisors in French.
Fundamental Language Subjects
21F.301 French I
Prereq.: -
Subjects in Language, Literature, and 21 F.320 Introduction to French Literature
Culture
Prereq.: French IV or equivalent
Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
These subjects (21 F.308, 310, 311, 320) are Acad Year 1997-98: U (Spring)
designed for students who have completed 3-0-9 HASS
French IV or its equivalent. They serve as a
transition between language study and A basic study of major French literary genres more advanced subjects In literature and - poetry, drama, and fiction - and an introcultures. Although each subject has a dif- duction to methods of literary analysis. Authors
include Voltaire, Balzac, Baudelaire, Apolferent emphasis, all provide students with
linaire, lonesco, Duras. Special attention
additional practice in reading, speaking,
and writing. devoted to the improvement of French language skills.
M. Roberts
Students may take several subjects from
these offerings. Native speakers of French
who have studied French literature at a
U (Fall, IAP, Spring) high school level must seek the
4-0-8 HASS instructor's approval for admission to any
Introduction to French language and culture. of these subjects.
Emphasis on the acquisition of vocabulary and
grammatical concepts through active com- 21 F.308 Advanced French Language Study
munication. Immediate exposure to authentic
French via video sources and printed Prereq.: French IV or equivalent
materials; for developing cultural awareness U (Spring)
as well as linguistic proficiency. Coordinated 3-0-9 HASS
language lab program. For those who have completed French IV or
S. Levet the equivalent, but who wish to continue with
language study before taking upper-level sub-
21F.302 French 11 jects in literature or culture. Development of
reading, writing, and phonetics through the
Prereq.: French I
use of a variety of documents, stories, and
U (Fall, Spring)
poems.
4-0-8 HASS
S. Levet
Further development of linguistic proficiency
through active communication. Expansion of 21F.310 French Conversation: Intensive
vocabulary and completion of the basics of Practice
French grammar. Continued exposure to culturally authentic audio and video materials in Prereq.: French IV or equivalent
the classroom and the language lab. Study of U (Fall)
short texts. Increased practice in writing. 3-0-9 HASS
S. Levet Systematic training in oral expression: communication skills, fluency, and idiomatic
21F.303 French Ill French. Audio and video tapes to improve conPrereq.: French 11 versational techniques and other forms of oral
expression (debates, speeches, reports, interU (Fall, Spring)
views). Discussion materials: newspapers,
4-0-8 HASS-D Language Option
magazines, recent films, and varied audio and
Review and expanded study of selected interactive video programs dealing with issues
aspects of French grammar. Analysis of films in contemporary France. Focus on cultural
and/or texts from a cross-cultural perspective. phenomena specific to French society. Special
Use of interactive multimedia materials for projects (video and other) by students. Limited
developing comprehension of authentic to 16.
spoken French and for the exploration of S. Waryn
French cultural attitudes and behaviors. Weekly practice in composition. Daily exercises in 21F.311 Introduction to French Culture
oral communication and vocabulary enrichment. Prereq.: French IV or equivalent
G. Furstenberg U (Fall)
3-0-9 HASS-D, Category 1
21 F.304 French IV Studies major social, political, and aesthetic
modes which have shaped French civilization.
Prereq.: French Ill
Coordinates the study of literature, film, and
U (Fall, Spring)
art with the historical evolution of France.
4-0-8 HASS-D Language Option
M. Roberts
Final subject in the French language sequence
before taking intermediate subjects in French
literature and culture. Further development of
linguistic skills, for improving the overall quality
of writing and oral fluency. The cultural content
of the course is provided by a variety of contemporary materials, ranging from comic
books, to short stories to films to interactive
CD-ROMs.
S. Waryn
492 Chapter Vill
