Department of Political Science Course 17
17.424 International Political Economy of Defense and Arms Control
Advanced Industrial Societies Studies
Prereq.: Permission of instructor
G (Spring)
17.460 Defense Politics 3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Prereq.:
Seminar provides an overview of international
political economy with specific reference to the
advanced industrial societies. Integrates international and comparative perspectives and
fuses microeconomic and institutionalist approaches. Compares and contrasts the role of
states in regulating intergroup conflicts over
domestic markets with the role of regimes in
regulating interstate conflicts over international
markets. Examines the rise and decline of
economic powers, industrial policy and trade
relations, financial and monetary politics, and
economic integration.
K. Oye
17.428 American Foreign Policy: Theory
and Method
Prereq.: Permission of instructor
G (Spring)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Examines the causes and consequences of
American foreign policy since 1898. Readings
cover theories of American foreign policy, historiography of American foreign policy, central
historical episodes including the two World
Wars and the Cold War, case study methodology, and historical investigative methods.
Open to undergraduates by permission of instructor.
S. Van Evera
17.430 Research Seminar in International
Relations
Prereq.: Permission of instructor
G (Spring)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
While this seminar provides an overview of
recent literature, its principal purpose is to help
graduate students develop skills suited to
production of research papers and/or dissertations. Begins by reviewing general theoretical
and methodological issues, then turns to
specific empirical studies that examine the effects of systems structure, national attributes,
bargaining processes, institutions, ideas, and
norms on security affairs and political
economy. The last two sessions of the seminar are devoted to evaluating research
proposals generated by all members of the
class.
K. Oye
17.432 Causes of War: Theory and Method
Prereq.: _
G (Fall)
3-0-9
Examines the causes of war. Major theories of
war are examined; case-study and large-n
methods of testing theories of war are discussed; and the case-study method is applied
to several historical cases. Cases covered include World Wars I and 11. Open to undergraduates only by permission of instructor.
S. Van Evera
-
G (Fall)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Examines the politics affecting US defense
policies before, during, and after the Cold War.
Includes consideration of intra- and inter-service rivalries, civil-military relations, contractor
influences, congressional oversight, and peace
movements in historical and contemporary
perspectives.
H. M. Sapolsky
17.462 Innovation in Military Organizations
Prereq.: -
G (Spring)
3-0-9
Explores the origins, rate, and impact of innovations in military organizations, doctrine,
and weapons. Emphasis on organization
theory approaches. Comparisons with nonmilitary and non-US experience included.
B. Posen, H. M. Sapolsky
17.468 Foundations of Security Studies
Prereq.: -
G (Fall)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Aims to develop a working knowledge of the
theories and conceptual frameworks that form
the intellectual basis of security studies as an
academic discipline. Particular emphasis on
balance of power theory, organization theory,
civil-military relations, and the relationship between war and politics. The reading list includes Jervis, Schelling, Waltz, Blainey, von
Clausewitz, Brodie, Allison, Steinbruner, and
Huntington. Students write a seminar paper in
which theoretical insights are systematically applied to a current security issue.
B. Posen
17.471 American National Security Policy
Prereq.: -
17.476J Analysis of Strategic Nuclear
Forces
(Same subject as STS.516J)
Prereq.:
U (Fall)
3-0-9 HASS
Introduces the student to the problems and issues confronting American national security
and the process by which American national
security policy is formulated. The nature of the
international system (post-World War II), the
theoretical requirements for deterrence and
defense, and alternative strategies for implementing American national security policy
are discussed. The roles of the President, National Security Council, Department of
Defense and armed services, the Congress,
and public opinion in formulating national
security policy are examined.
S. M. Meyer
-
G (Fall)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Introduces the assessment of strategic nuclear
forces. Emphasizes the development of force
requirements and methods for analyzing alternative force postures in terms of missions, effectiveness, and cost. The history of the
US-Soviet strategic competition provides the
backdrop against which the evolution of
nuclear strategy and forces is considered.
T. Postol
17.477J Technology and Policy of Weapons
Systems
(Same subject as STS.076J)
Prereq.: -
U (Spring)
3-0-9 HASS
See description under subject STS.076J.
T. Postol
17.482J US General Purpose Forces
(Subject meets with 17.483J, STS.071J,
STS.532J)
Prereq.: -
G (Spring)
2-0-7 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
17.483J US General Purpose Forces
(Subject meets with 17.482J, STS.071J, STS.532J)
Prereq.: -
U (Spring)
3-0-9 HASS
Examines the evolving roles and missions of
US General Purpose Forces within the context
of modern technological capabilities and
Grand Strategy, which is a conceptual system
of interconnected political and military means
and ends. Topics include US Grand
Strategies; the organization of the US military;
the defense budget; and the capabilities and
limitations of naval, air, and ground forces.
Also examines the utility of these forces for
power projection and the problems of escalation. Analyzes military history and simple
models of warfare to explore how variations in
technology and battlefield conditions can drastically alter effectiveness of conventional forces.
B. Posen, T. Postol
Descriptions of Subjects 469
