School of Humanities and Social Science
17.319 Environmental Politics and Policy
Prereq.: -
U (Spring)
3-0-9 HASS-D, Category 4
Examines the collision of politics, economics,
values, and science in making and carrying out
environmental policy at national, state, and
local levels. Case studies of environmental
policymaking explore the roles of governmental institutions, business, interest groups, the
public, and the media in areas of air and water
pollution, hazardous waste disposal, public
lands management, and wildlife protection.
S. M. Meyer
17.328J Science and Technology in
International Affairs
(Same subject as STS.525J)
Prereq.: 17.302J or permission of instructor
Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: G (Fall)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Examines the generic relationship between
science and technology and central aspects of
international affairs, including economic structure, security relationships, and global
dangers. Explores process of interaction, the
nature of changes in the international political system, and implications for national and international government. Undergraduates may be
admitted with permission of the instructor.
E. B. Skolnikoff
International Relations/Arms
Control and Defense Studies
International Relations and
Foreign PoliCy
17.403 American Foreign Policy: Past,
Present, and Future
Prereq.: -
17.405 Seminar on Middle East Politics
(Subject meets with 17.406)
Prereq.:
U (Fall)
3-0-9 HASS-D, Category 4
Subject's mission is to explain and evaluate
America's past and present foreign policies.
What accounts for America's past wars and interventions? What were the consequences of
American policies? Overall, were these consequences positive or negative for the US? For
the world? Using today's 20/20 hindsight, can
we now identify policies that would have
produced better results? History covered includes World Wars I and II, the Korean and Indochina wars, and the Cuban Missile Crisis.
Recent and contemporary crises and issues
also covered.
S. Van Evera
-
Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: U (Fall)
3-0-6 HASS
17.406 Seminar on Middle East Politics
(Subject meets with 17.405) Prereq.: Permission of instructor
Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: G (Fall)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Focuses on evolution of contemporary politics
and economics. Divided into four parts:
1) historical background, 2) domestic and
regional politics of the Arab East, Iran and the
Gulf, the Maghreb, and Israel; 3) energy: the
world oil and energy picture; 4) Middle East and world politics: geostrategic shifts, Arab-Israeli conflicts and peace process, the Iran-Iraq
war, the Gulf War, and their interaction with
energy issues. Graduate students are expected to pursue the subject in greater depth
through reading and individual research.
N. Choucri
17.410 Political Economy of Global Change
Prereq.: - Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: G (Fall)
3-0-9
Tracing the evolution of international environmental issues in political and economic terms,
this subject explores types of human determinants and consequences of global change,
the ranges and types of uncertainties, and the
potential attendant implication for policy. Of
concern are linkages among individuals, nation-states, transnational organizations and
firms, international systems, and global environments. Special focus is placed on comparative public policy for environmental
management, on challenges of sustainable
development, and on evolving modes and
models of international and institutional responses to global change.
N. Choucri
17.412 Evolution of International
Environmental Law: Implications for
Technology
Prereq.: -
17.420 Theories of International
Relations
Prereq.: Permission of instructor
G (Fall)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Critical analysis of contending theories of international relations. Focus is on alternative historical forms, theoretical assumptions,
analytical structure, and basic core. Comparative analysis of realism(s), liberalism(s),
European, nonwestern, and new emergent
theories. Discussion of connections between
theories of international relations and major
changes in international relations. Open to undergraduates by permission of instructor.
N. Choucri
17.422 Contending Paradigms of
International Political Economy
Prereq.: Permission of instructor
G (Spring)
3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Interdisciplinary analysis of ways in which nations undertake dual international objectives:
pursuit of power and pursuit of wealth. Surveys major competing paradigms of international political economy, including neoclassical
economics, development and ecological economics, lateral pressure, dependency and
interdependence perspectives, and structural
views of power relations. Examines political
and economic dimensions of international
trade, capital flows, foreign investment, intellectual property rights, international migration,
and select issues in foreign economic policy.
Examines the evolution of international
economic institutions and attendant political implications. Open to undergraduates by permission of instructor.
N. Choucri
17.423 Causes and Prevention of War
Prereq.:
Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: G (Fall)
3-0-9
Graduate-level subject designed as directed research in the general area of international relations, focusing on issues related to:
international institutions, international political
economy, internal-external linkages, environmental management, and critical potential
trade-offs and their management (such as
trade-environment, security-stability, among
others). Students engage in either a research
initiative or project of their choosing, or on an
issue or problem jointly selected with the instructor.
N. Choucri
-
U (Spring)
4-0-8 HASS
Examines the causes of war, with a focus on
practical measures to prevent and control war.
Topics covered include: causes and consequences of national misperception; military
strategy and policy as cause of war; US
foreign policy as a cause of war and peace;
and the likelihood and possible nature of
another world war. Historical cases are examined, including World War I, World War II,
Korea, and Indochina.
S. Van Evera
468 Chapter Vill
