School of Humanities and Social Science
17.484 Comparative Grand Strategy and
Military Doctrine
Prereq.: -
Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: G (Fall)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
A comparative study of the grand strategies
and military doctrines of the great powers in
Europe (Britain, France, Germany, and Russia) from the late nineteenth to the mid-twentieth century. Examines strategic
developments in the years preceding and
during World Wars I and II. What factors have
exerted the greatest influence on national
strategies? How may the quality of a grand
strategy be judged? Exploration of comparative case study methodology also plays a
central role. What consequences seem to follow from grand strategies of different types?
Open to undergraduates with permission of instructor.
B. Posen
See also 17.301J, 17.302J, 17.328J, 17.403,
17.405, 17.406, 17.420, 17.428.
Comparative Politics/
Political Development/
Communist Studies
Theories and Research Methods
17.501 Introduction to Comparative
Politics: Paths of Development
(New)
Prereq.: -
17.510 Language and Politics
Prereq.:
U (Fall)
3-0-9 HASS
Investigates the historical origins of major political and economic differences among countries
of the world. Questions addressed include:
Why did democracy emerge first, and establish
itself most firmly, in Western Europe and North
America? Why did communism arise in Russia
and China? Why did the Soviet empire break
down? What is so unique about Japan? Why
have certain Latin American and East Asian
countries been so successful in achieving
economic development? Why have African
countries experienced so many coups? Why
are so many countries in Asia, Eastern
Europe, Latin America, and Africa currently undergoing transitions to democracy?
F. Schaffer
-
Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: G (Fall)
3-0-9
Explores language as a medium of both political action and inquiry. General discussion of
the nature of language, language change, and
the relations of language to culture. Examines
the ways that literacy and orality affect politics,
and how speaking itself is often a form of political action. Investigates how language is used
as an instrument of both domination and liberation, and to both conceal and reveal. Examines current debates on the structure of
concepts and discusses the implications of this
debate for political research.
F. Schaffer
17.512 Political Culture and Democracy
(Revised Content)
Prereq.: -
17.515 Democracy in Comparative
Perspective
Prereq.:
Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: G (Spring)
3-0-9
Explores the strengths and weaknesses of
political culture theory by examining critically
its contributions to the study of democracy. Six
interrelated questions are asked: Are there cultural preconditions for the establishment and
consolidation of democracy? If so, which elements are most important? How broadly must
these elements be distributed among various
groups and strata of society? Where do
democratic norms come from? How important
is culture relative to other factors? What are
the most important critiques of cultural explanations?
F. Schaffer
17.514 Philosophy of Science and the
Methodology of Comparative Politics
(New)
Prereq.: Graduate work in comparative politics
or permission of instructor
Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: G (Spring)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Offers tools to analyze the philosophical and
methodological issues encountered in designing and conducting dissertation projects in
comparative politics. Topics include: nature of
the scientific endeavor; differences between
natural and social sciences; explanation vs understanding as approaches to human behavior; function of categories in comparative
politics; evolutionary arguments; functionalist
arguments; rational-choice arguments; arguments from small-N comparisons. A number of
empirically-based studies by practicing social
scientists employing various methodological
and philosophical approaches are considered.
D. Woodruff
-
Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: U (Fall)
3-0-9 HASS
Raises questions about what actually counts
as a democracy and what it means to call a
regime democratic by examining the functioning of (arguably) democratic political systems
in a variety of contemporary and historical contexts. Case studies drawn from Ancient
Athens, Africa, the Middle East, the Soviet
Union, Europe, and the United States.
Theoretical insight provided by thinkers such
as Thucydides, Rousseau, Marx, Mill, Schumpeter, Dahl, and Mansbridge.
F. Schaffer
17.516 Retribution and Reparations
(New)
Prereq.: -
G (Spring)
3-0-9
Emerging democracies are now confronted
with what has been termed "the torturer problem." The questions are old ones: what is to
be done about the abuser(s) and what is to be
done for the abused? Seminar broadly examines the comparative, historical and
philosophical dimensions of the related topics
of retribution, reparation, and reconciliation.
M. Nobles
17.522 Comparative Politics of Race and
Ethnicity
Prereq.: -
Acad Year 1996-97: G (Fall)
Acad Year 1997-98: Not offered
3-0-9
Examines the related phenomena known as
"race," "ethnicity," and "racial/ethnic" politics.
Particular attention is paid to determining, by
way of competing theories and various national cases, what makes politics distinctively "racial and/or ethnic." Examines first how
theorists approach race and ethnicity; then
analyzes the consequences of racial/ethnic
identification for modern governance and
economic development. Topics include: ethnic/racial competition and conflict, electoral
party systems, and race/ethnic target public
policies.
M. Nobles
17.523 Ethnicity and Race in World Politics
Prereq.: -
Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: U (Fall)
3-0-9 HASS
Ethnic and racial conflict appear to be the
hallmark of the new world order. What accounts for the rise of ethnic/racial and
nationalist sentiments and movements? What
is the basis of ethnic and racial identity? What
are the political claims and goals of such movements and is conflict inevitable? Introduces students to dominant theoretical approaches to
race, ethnicity, and nationalism, and considers
them in light of current events in Africa,
Europe, and the Americas.
M. Nobles
470 Chapter Vill
