School of Humanities and Social Science
Special Topics History
21F.910 Special Topics in Foreign
Languages and Literatures
Prereq.: -
U (Fall)
Units arranged
Can be repeated for credit
21 F.911 Special Topics in Foreign
Languages and Literatures
Prereq.: -
Consult History Headquarters, E51-285, for
the most up-to-date information about
requirements and subject offerings.
American History
U (lAP, Spring)
Survey Subjects
Units arranged
Can be repeated for credit
21H.101 American History to 1865
Advanced work in foreign languages and literatures for students wishing to pursue topics or Prereq.:
projects not provided for by regular subject offerings. Before registering, student must plan
course of study with appropriate instructor in
the Section and secure the approval of the
Section Head. Normal maximum is 6 units; to
count toward HASS Requirement, 9 units are
required. Exceptional 9-unit projects occasionally approved.
Consult Foreign Languages and Literatures
Headquarters.
For individual research in Foreign Languages and Literatures, register for
21F.UR or 21F.URG. For Foreign Languages
and Literatures pre-thesis tutorial, register
for 21F.ThT. For undergraduate thesis,
register for 21F.ThU. Descriptions of these
subjects can be found in the beginning of
this section under 21.UR, 21.URG, 21.ThT,
and 21.ThU on page 487.
-
U (Fall)
3-0-9 HASS
A basic history of American social, economic,
and political development from the colonial
period through the Civil War. Examines the differences between Indians and European settlers; the colonial heritages of Spanish and
British America; the American Revolution and
its impact; the establishment and growth of the
new nation; the Civil War, its background, character, and impact. Readings are from modern
scholarship as well as writings of the period, including those of Winthrop, Paine, Madison,
H. B. Stowe, and Lincoln.
J. Saillant
21H.102 The Emergence of Modern
America, 1865 to the Present
Prereq.: -
U (Fall)
3-0-9 HASS-D, Category 5
Examines four central issues in the development of modern America: the ways in which different groups sought to alter society; the rise
of a strong central government and its effect
on the nation; the impact of the nation's role as
a superpower on domestic life; and changes in
the lives of Americans from 1865 to the
present. Using primary documents as well as
secondary interpretations, subject explores issues of politics, economics, race, and gender
from Reconstruction to the 1990s.
H. Richardson
21 H.1 03 Family, Work, and Leisure in
America, 1600 to the Present
Prereq.: -
21H.104J Riots, Strikes, and Conspiracies
in American History
(Same subject as 11.01 5J)
Prereq.:
U (Spring)
3-0-9 HASS-D, Category 5
An interdisciplinary exploration of changes in
family life, work, and leisure among a diversity
of Americans in four historical contexts - the
pre-industrial North, the antebellum South, the
early twentieth century, and our own time.
Topics include gender roles, transformations in
the organization and meaning of work, the
relationship between private and public life,
and changing ideals and experiences of
leisure.
C. Appy
-
U (Fall)
3-0-9 HASS-D, Category 5
Readings and discussions focusing on a series
of short-term events that shed light on
American culture and social organization. The
events studied in 1995 were the antiabolitionist "riot' at Alton, Illinois, in 1837, the
lockout and strike at Homestead, Pennsylvania, in 1892, the uprising at Columbia
University in 1968, and the takeover of Attica
penitentiary in 1971. Emphasis on finding
ways to make sense of these complicated,
highly traumatic events, and on using them to
understand larger processes of change in
American history.
P. Maler, R. M. Fogelson
21H.111 Colonial America
Prereq.: -
Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: U (Fall)
3-0-9 HASS
North American history to 1763 with particular
attention to the development of society and
politics in the British colonies. Topics include
the British, French, and Spanish empires; insurrections, witchcraft, and slavery; economic,
social, and religious change; war, politics, and
political ideology on the eve of the American
Revolution. Readings are drawn from the most
recent historical scholarship as well as documents of the time.
P. Maier
21H.112 The American Revolution
Prereq.: -
Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: U (Fall)
3-0-9 HASS
English and American backgrounds of the
Revolution; issues and arguments in the AngloAmerican conflict; colonial resistance and the
beginnings of republicanism; the Revolutionary
War; constitution writing for the states and nation; effects of the American Revolution. Concerned primarily with the revolutionary origins
of American government. Readings emphasize documents from the period -
pamphlets, correspondence, the minutes or
resolutions of resistance organizations, constitutional documents and debates.
P. Maier
500 Chapter Vill
