Music Course 21M
21M.284 Film Music
Prereq.: -
Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: U (Spring)
3-3-6 HASS
A chronological survey of styles and functions
of music in American and European films. The
first half covers nineteenth-century forerunners, the silent film, and music in synchronized
sound films up to 1950. The second half
focuses on innovative uses of music from the
1950s up to the present. Related topics include: theories of film music, specialized genres (musical, documentaries, animated films),
and the impact of video. Listening, reading,
and viewing assignments serve as the basis
for papers and class discussion. Some background in the study of film and/or music is helpful.
M. Marks
21M.291 Music of India
Prereq.: -
U (Fall)
3-0-9 HASS
Presents the classical, popular, and folk music
of North and South India, with the primary
focus on the Hindustani traditions of the North.
Through reading, listening, and vocal exercises, the classical forms of raga and tala are
explained and practiced.
G. E. Ruckert
21M.292 Music of Indonesia
Prereq.: -
21 M.302 Harmony and Counterpoint I1 PerformanCe
Prereq.: 21M.301
U (Fall, Spring) Each of the following subjects earns six
3-3-6 HASS units. A total of 12 units is needed for a subA continuation of Harmony and Counterpoint I, ject to count toward Institute Requirements
including chromatic harmony and modulation, in Humanities, Arts, and Social Sciences,
more elaborate contrapuntal textures, key- by petition to the COC.
board laboratory, and sight-singing choir.
E. Cohen, P. Child, E. Ziporyn 21 M.401 MIT Concert Choir
Prereq.: 21M.303 Writing in Tonal Forms
Prereq.: 21M.302
U (Fall, Spring)
3-0-9 HASS
Written and analytic exercises based on
nineteenth-century small forms and harmonic
practice found in music such as Schubert
Landler and songs, Schumann small piano
pieces and songs, and Chopin preludes and
mazurkas.
P. Child, E. Cohen
21 M.304 Advanced Music Writing
Prereq.: 21M.303
U (Spring)
3-0-9 HASS
Further written and analytic exercises in tonal
music, focusing on large forms. Typically, students compose a sonata-form movement for
piano, string quartet, or other small ensemble.
Opportunities to write short works that experiment with the expanded tonal techniques of
the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries.
P. Child
U (Spring)
3-0-9 HASS
21M.340 Jazz Harmony and Arranging
The Indonesian archipelago is home to a wide
variety of cultures and musical traditions, many Prereq.: 21M.051 or 21M.052, 21M.266
of them largely unknown in the West. From the U (Spring)
gamelan percussion orchestras of Bali and 3-0-9 HASS
Java to the indigenous folk traditions of Basic harmony for students interested in acSumatra and Borneo, as well as western-in- quiring practical skill in nonclassical music;
fluenced pop and street traditions, subject also includes required listening, mainly jazz, as
provides an introduction to these fascinating, background for the written work. Serves as
intricate musics. Includes ongoing instruction preparation for more advanced work in jazz
culminating in a small performance. and rock arranging and in the composition of
E. Ziporyn popular songs. Permission of instructor required.
M. Harvey
21 M.351 Music Composition
Theory/Composition
Prereq.: 21M.304
Acad Year 1996-97: U (Fall, Spring)
21 M.301 Harmony and Counterpoint I Acad Year 1997-98: Not offered
3-0-9 HASS
Prereq.: 21 M.051 or 21 M.052 or permission of Can be repeated for credit
instructor
U (Fall, Spring) Directed composition of larger forms of original
3-3-6 HASS-D, Category 3 writing involving voices and/or instruments. Includes a weekly seminar in composition for the
Basic writing skills in music of the common- examination of major works from twentieth-cenpractice period (Bach to Brahms). Work in- tury music literature and for the presentation
cludes regular written assignments leading to and discussion of student work in progress.
the composition of short pieces, analyzing rep- Students expected to produce at least one subresentative works from the literature, keyboard stantive work, performed in public, by the end
laboratory, and sight-singing choir. It is recom- of the term. Open to qualified undergraduates.
mended that entering students have some con- E. Cohen
cert music listening or playing background.
Enrollment may be limited.
E. Cohen, E. Ruehr, M. Harvey, G. Ruckert
-
U (Fall, Spring)
0-4-2
Can be repeated for credit
Rehearsals and performance of large-scale
works for chorus, soloists, and orchestra -
from the Passions and Mass of J.S. Bach to
oratorios of our own time. Open to graduate
and undergraduate students by audition.
W. Cutter
21 M.405 MIT Chamber Chorus
Prereq.: -
U (Fall, Spring)
3-0-3
Can be repeated for credit
Rehearsal and performance of choral repertoire for small chorus, involving literature from
the Renaissance to contemporary periods.
Membership limited to 32 students by audition.
W. Cutter
21M.410 Vocal Repertoire and Performance
(Subject meets with 21 M.515)
Prereq.: -
U (Spring)
3-0-3
Can be repeated for credit
For the young singer interested in the study
and performance of the vocal literature with
special attention to diction and vocal technique. Topics each semester include German
Lieder or French melodies, as well as songs in
the English language. Participation in MIT
Chamber Chorus is required (no extra credit).
Admission by audition. Meets with graduate
subject 21M.515, but assignments differ.
Staff
21 M.421 MIT Symphony
Prereq.: -
U (Fall, Spring)
0-4-2
Can be repeated for credit
An option available to members of the MIT
Symphony Orchestra. Rehearsals prepare
works for concerts and recordings. Analyses of
musical style, structure, and performance practice are integrated into rehearsals as a means
of enriching musical conception and the approach to performance. Likewise, additional
scores of particular structural or stylistic interest are read whenever time permits.
D. M. Epstein
Descriptions of Subjects 513
