Literature Course 21L
Literature
Consult Literature Headquarters, 14N-409, for
the most up-to-date information about
requirements and subject offerings.
The subjects listed below are arranged in
three graduated categories or tiers:
1) Introductory subjects (21L.001-21L.021),
focused on major literary texts grouped in
broad historical and generic sequences, all
carrying HASS Distribution credit. Enrollment in HASS-D subjects is strictly limited
to a maximum of 25 students per section.
2) Intermediate subjects (21 L.422-21 L.512),
some carrying HASS Distribution credit
and some limited to students who have already taken one literature course. Intermediate subjects explore literary forms in
greater depth and center on historical
periods, literary themes, or genres. Students are encouraged to consult individual
instructors about prerequisite requirements.
3) Seminars (21 L.701-21 L.708), restricted
to students who have taken at least two previous subjects in literature. Enrollment in
seminars is strictly limited to a maximum
of 12 students.
A supplement to this catalogue, available
from the Literature Section offices, offers
more detailed descriptions of all literature
subjects and includes specific information
about required texts, writing assignments,
and examinations.
Introductory Subjects
21 L.001 Foundations of Western Culture 1:
Homer to Dante
Prereq.: -
21 L.002 Foundations of Western Culture II:
Renaissance to Modernity
Prereq.:
U (Fall, Spring)
3-0-9 HASS-D, Category 2
Studies a broad range of texts essential to understanding the two great sources of modern
conceptions of the world and humanity's place
within it: the ancient world of Greece and
Rome and the Judeo-Christian world that challenged and absorbed it. Typical reading list includes Homer, Sophocles, Aristotle, Plato,
Thucydides, Virgil, Lucretius, St. Augustine,
and Dante.
Staff, J. Buzard
-
U (Fall)
3-0-9 HASS-D, Category 2
Complementary to 21 L 001. A broad survey of
texts - literary, philosophical, and
sociological - studied to trace the growth of
secular humanism, the loss of a supernatural
perspective upon human events, and changing
conceptions of individuality and social and
communal purpose. Stresses appreciation and
analysis of texts that came to represent the
common cultural possession of our time.
A. Kibel
21L.003 Introduction to Fiction
Prereq.: -
U (Fall, Spring)
3-0-9 HASS-D, Category 1
Introduces prose narrative, both short stories
and the novel. Examines the construction of
narrative and the analysis of literary response.
R. Perry, W. Kelley
21 L.004 Major Poets
Prereq.: -
U (Fall, Spring)
3-0-9 HASS-D, Category 1
Emphasis on the analytical reading of lyric
poetry in England and the United States. Syllabus usually includes Shakespeare's sonnets,
Donne, Keats, Dickinson, Frost, Eliot,
Marianne Moore, Lowell, Rich, and Bishop.
J. Hildebidle, S. Tapscott
21L.005 Introduction to Dramatic Art
Prereq.: -
U (Fall)
3-0-9 HASS-D, Category 3
A study of the history of theater art and practice from its origins to the modern period, including its development in nonwestern
cultures. Special attention to the relationship
between theater and the intellectual, social,
and political currents of its time. Readings include representative critical theory and description as well as major playscripts.
D. Henderson
21 L.006 American Literature
Prereq.: -
21 L.008 The Bible
Prereq.:
U (Fall)
3-0-9 HASS-D, Category 1
Studies the national literature of the United
States since the early nineteenth century. Considers novels, essays, and poems, focusing on
efforts to define and reform a sense of
American identity amidst increasing awareness of cultural diversity. Readings in the
works of such writers as Hawthorne, Thoreau,
Frederick Douglass, Dickinson, Frost,
Faulkner, Maxine Kingston, and Amy Tan.
W. Kelley
-
U (Spring)
3-0-9 HASS
An introduction to major Biblical texts including
Genesis, Exodus, Job, the prophetic and historic books of the Old Testament, and the
Gospels and Epistles. Stresses the place of
the Bible as foundation text for central
religious, ethical, and political thinking. Comparative readings in related traditions, ancient,
Near Eastern, and Middle Eastern. Investigation of the Bible as influence in later narrative,
philosophic, and artistic traditions.
Staff
21 L.009 Shakespeare
Prereq.: -
U (Fall, Spring)
3-0-9 HASS-D, Category 1
Close study of the major comedies, histories,
and tragedies in the context of Renaissance
thought, Elizabethan theatre, and the political
and social setting of Shakespeare's age. Lectures and class discussions each week, supplemented by occasional reading of scenes and
attendance at live or filmed performances.
P. Donaldson, M. Fuller, S. Raman, D. Henderson
21L.011 The Film Experience
Prereq.: -
Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: U (Fall, Spring)
3-3-6 HASS-D, Category 3
An introduction to narrative film, emphasizing
the unique properties of the movie house and
the motion-picture camera, the historical evolution of the film medium, and the intrinsic artistic
qualities of individual films. Syllabus changes
from semester to semester, but usually includes such directors as Griffith, Chaplin,
Renoir, Ford, Hitchcock, De Sica, Fellini.
D. Thorbum, H. Jenkins
21 L.01 2 Forms of Western Narrative
Prereq.: -
U (Spring)
3-0-9 HASS-D, Category 1
Major narrative texts from diverse western cultures, beginning with Homer and concluding
with at least one film. Emphasis on literary and
cultural issues: on the artistic significance of
the chosen texts and on their identity as
anthropological artifacts whose conventions
and assumptions are rooted in particular
times, places, and technologies. Syllabus
varies, but always includes a sampling of
popular culture (folk tales, ballads) as well as
at least three landmark narratives such as the
Iliad or the Odyssey, Don Quixote, Anna
Karenina, Ulysses, a classic film.
D. Thorburn
Descriptions of Subjects 507
