Department of Linguistics and Philosophy Course 24
Course 24 Linguistics and Philosophy
For degree requirements, see listing in
Chapter VII under the School of
Humanities and Social Science.
Philosophy
24.UR Undergraduate Research
Prereq.: -
U (Fall, Spring)
Units arranged [P/D/F]
Can be repeated for credit
Undergraduate research opportunities in Linguistics and Philosophy. For further information, consult the Departmental coordinators.
Linguistics: W. O'Neil.
Philosophy: J. Thomson.
24.00 Problems of Philosophy
Prereq.: -
U (Fall, Spring)
3-0-9 HASS-D, Category 2
Introduction to the problems of philosophy, in
particular, to problems in ethics; metaphysics;
theory of knowledge; and philosophy of logic,
language, and science. A systematic rather
than historical approach. Readings from classical and contemporary sources, but emphasis
is on examination and evaluation of proposed
solutions to the problems.
J. Thomson, V. McGee
24.01 Philosophy and Public Affairs
Prereq.: -
24.02 What is the Best Way to Live?
(New)
Prereq.:
Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: U (Fall, Spring)
3-0-9 HASS
Issues such as abortion, punishment, and pornography are emotionally laden and practically
urgent. It is easy to have opinions on such matters, but difficult to think them through. Learning to think clearly and systematically about
concrete issues is the point of this subject.
Focus is on the critical examination of the arguments presented by the authors read, but
broad aim is for student to develop the
capacity for self-reflection about concrete
moral issues.
Staff
-
U (Fall)
3-0-9 HASS-D, Category 2
What is the best way to live? How important is
moral integrity, or personal happiness, or individual autonomy and self-expression, if one
is to live in the best way that one can? Examines classics texts from the history of
Western philosophy, and some literary, nonphilosophical texts, bearing on these questions. These texts include works by Sophocles,
Thucydides, Plato, Kant, Schiller, J. S. Mill,
Marx, Nietzsche, and Dickens. Emphasis on
close analysis and evaluation of philosophical
ideas and arguments.
R. Wedgwood
24.03 Relativism, Reason, and Reality
Prereq.: -
U (Spring)
3-0-9 HASS-D, Category 2
An examination of philosophical issues on the
theme of relativism. Are moral standards relative to cultures and/or moral frameworks? Are
there incompatible or non-comparable ways of
thinking about the world that are somehow
equally good? Can any sense be made of the
idea that truth is relative? Is rationality - the
notion of a good reason to believe something
- relative to cultural norms? Is the idea of a
completely objective description of the world incoherent? Discussion of these questions
through the writings of contemporary
philosophers such as Thomas Kuhn, Nelson
Goodman, Bernard Williams, and Hilary Putnam. Emphasis on ways of making these
vague questions precise, and critical evaluation of philosophical arguments.
A. Byrne
24.04J Justice
(Same subject as 17.115J)
Prereq.: -
24.05 Philosophy of Science
Prereq.:
U (Spring)
3-0-9 HASS-D, Category 2
An examination of alternative theories of justice - utilitarianism, rights theories, social contract theory, and communitarianism - and the
implications of those theories for problems of
liberty, equality, and community. Readings
drawn principally from the work of contemporary political philosophers, including Rawls,
Nozick, Dworkin, Walzer, Macintyre, and
Buchanan.
A. Maclntyre
-
U (Fall)
3-0-9 HASS-D, Category 2
An introduction to fundamental philosophical
problems concerning the nature of science
and its development. How, for example, is
scientific knowledge arrived at; in what circumstances are theories rejected and
replaced; what criteria or values govern these
processes; and do they vary from one science
to another? Are observed facts given once and
for all, independent of theory, or does change
of theory change what is to be a datum? Do
scientific theories describe an underlying
reality, or do they merely provide an economical systemization of experimental results?
E Hall
24.07 Classics in the History of Philosophy
Prereq.: -
Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: U (Spring)
3-0-9 HASS
Introduction to philosophy through its history.
Readings in the works of such philosophers as
Plato, Aristotle, Aquinas, Descartes, Hume,
and Kant. Emphasis on becoming closely acquainted with important historical texts and examining fundamental philosophical issues as
they appear in works that have been especially influential in the development of Western
philosophy.
Staff
24.09J Classics in Political Philosophy
(Same subject as 17.113J)
Prereq.: -
Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: U (Spring)
3-0-9 HASS
An introduction to theories of social justice
through a study of classical works in the history of political philosophy, including Plato's
Republic, Hobbes's Leviathan, Locke's
Second Treatise, Rousseau's Social Contract,
and Marx's German Ideology. Focus on such
questions of political order as: Why (if at all)
should there be a state? What are the limits of
legitimate political authority? Should the state
seek to advance a particular view of the good
life?
Staff
Descriptions of Subjects 531
