Music Course 21M
21 M.706J Identity Politics In Performance 21M.740 Introduction to Stagecraft
(New)
Prereq.:
(Same subject as SP.471J)
Prereq.: 21 M.700 or permission of instructor
U (Fall)
4-3-2 HASS
In this performance workshop, students
engage in the creation of theatrical material
that explores current political and academic
debates on identity issues. Includes practical
performance work; discussion of selected readings about identity politics in performance; and
study of dramatic texts, videos, and performances that focus on identity issues. Each
semester focuses on a different theme
(gender, class, race, or sexual orientation).
B. Cotto-Escalera
21 M.707 Actor-Created Theater
Prereq.: 21 M.700 or permission of instructor
U (Fall)
4-3-2 HASS
Develops the performer as creator of the
theatrical event. Proposes ensemble work and
collective creation of a performance in
progress. Designed to help students develop a
working process; to offer students the opportunity to collaborate in the creation of a "new
work" born of their own ideas, motivations, and
inspirations; and to support the struggle to find
new language for that unique working relationship. Requires outside work with others.
K. Mancuso
21M.731 Principles of Design
Prereq. --
U (Fall)
3-3-3 HASS
Can be repeated for credit
Deals with more advanced design theories
and textual analysis. Emphasis on script
analysis in general, as well as from a
designer's perspective. Students also refine
technical skills in rendering and presentation,
historical research, and analysis. Class sessions include interaction with student/faculty
directors and other staff designers. Goal is for
students to approach text with a fresh vision
and translate that vision into design for performance.
W. Fregosi, E. Darna, L. Held
21 M.735 Design for the Theater
Prereq.: 21 M.731 or permission of instructor
U (Fall, Spring)
3-3-3 HASS
Can be repeated for credit
Intensive study in the principles and execution
of one particular area of theater design. Focus
on lighting, scenic, and costume design
rotates each semester. Substantial participation in at least one project in the semester
productions of Dramashop, Shakespeare Ensemble, or other production with the approval
of the instructor. Fall Term: Costume Design.
Spring Term: Scenic Design.
W. Fregosi, E. Darna, L. Held
-
U (Spring)
3-3-3 HASS
Introduces students to the variety and scope of
stagecraft while they learn basic shop skills.
Students develop shop vocabulary and learn
basic skills, including the safe use of all shop
machines, basic handwork skills, names and
uses of tools, and an overview of the various
activities that go on in each shop. In each
seven-week segment, student complete a
project that uses all basic skills.
W. Fregosi, E. Darna, L. Held
21M.781 Playwriting I
Prereq.: -
21 M.795 Play Production for Directors
Prereq.: 21M.790
U (Spring)
0-6-3 HASS
Leads students through the directorial process
from a project's inception, through conceptualization, collaboration with designers and actors, and finally into production.
Experimentation with presentational and representational styles of theater. Students examine
a selection of material, some scripted, some
not. Directors team up with designers to
develop a unified design concept for the
project. The directors use design elements
and concepts to work with actors.
M. Ouellette
U (Fall, Spring)
3-3-6 HASS
An introduction to the craft of writing for the Special Topics/Advanced Subjects
theater. Through weekly exercises and work
on a sustained piece, students explore the
problems of scene structure, action, and their 21 M.805 Theater Practicum
relation to the dialogue. Class meetings inPrereq.: At least one studio subject or permisclude examination of produced playscripts and
sion of instructor
discussion of student work. U (Fall, IAP, Spring)
L. Harrington, A. Brody
0-5-1
Can be repeated for credit
21M.785 Playwrights' Workshop
Directed practice in acting, directing, or design
Prereq.: 21 M.781 or permission of instructor on a sustained theater piece, either one-act or
U (Spring) full length, from pre-rehearsal preparation to
3-2-7 HASS workshop production. Consult Theater Arts OfCan be repeated for credit fice.
Continued work in the development of E. Dama
playscripts for the theater. Writers work on sustained pieces in weekly workshop meetings, in- 21 M.830 Acting Techniques of Style
dividual consultation with the instructor, and in (New)
collaboration with student actors, directors,
Prereq.: 21 M.700 and 21 M.705
and designers from the Dramashop and
U (Fall, Spring)
Shakespeare Ensemble. Fully developed
4-0-5 HASS
scripts will be eligible for inclusion in the
Can be repeated for credit
Playwrights' Workshop Production.
A. Brody Topics vary from term to term. Subject concentrates on Shakespeare: incorporating a
21 M.790 The Director's Craft freed body and voice, and looking at the structure of the verse and the actor/audience
Prereq.: 21 M.700 and 21 M.655 or permission relationship. In the Spring, subject focuses on
of instructor modern, Restoration, and twentieth-century
U (Fall)
plays, juxtaposing different periods and styles.
3-3-3 HASS T. Packer
Explores several models of directing, each
with its unique structures, philosophy, terminol- 21M.851 Special Topics in Drama
ogy, and techniques. Exploration is intended to
Prereq.: Permission of instructor
lead to the development of an individual voice
U (Fall, lAP, Spring)
for each student and clarity in his/her direcUnits arranged
torial point of view. Class sessions concentrate
Can be repeated for credit
on how a point of view is arrived at through
analysis of material and the way the results 21M.852 Special Topics in Drama
are rendered with the basic tools of theater. All
Prereq.: Permission of instructor
points of view are honored as long as they can
U (Fall, IAP, Spring)
be actively supported by the work.
J. Sonenberg Units arranged [P/D/F
Can be repeated for credit
Designed to allow students to pursue topics of
interest as independent study. Enrollment requires approval of the Director of Theater Arts.
HASS credit for Special Topics subjects
awarded only by individual petitions to the
Committee on Curricula. Normal maximum is 6
units; to count toward HASS Requirement, 9
units are required. Exceptional 9-unit projects
occasionally approved.
B. Cotto-Escalera
Descriptions of Subjects 517
