Department of Nuclear Engineering Course 22
Course 22 Nuclear Engineering
For degree requirements, see listing in
Chapter V1I under the School of
Engineering.
Undergraduate Subjects
22.UR Undergraduate Research
Opportunities Program
Prereq.: -
U (Fall, Spring, Summer)
Units arranged [P/D/F]
Can be repeated for credit
22.URG Undergraduate Research
Opportunities Program
Prereq.: -
U (Fall, Spring, Summer)
Units arranged
Can be repeated for credit
The Undergraduate Research Opportunities
Program is an excellent way for undergraduate
students to become familiar with the Department of Nuclear Engineering. Student research as a UROP project has been
conducted in areas of fission reactor studies,
utilization of fusion devices, applied radiation
research, and biomedical applications.
Projects include the study of engineering
aspects for both fusion and fission energy
sources. UROP Department Coordinator:
S. H. Chen.
22.ThU Undergraduate Thesis
Prereq.: -
U (Fall, Spring)
Units arranged
Can be repeated for credit
Program of undergraduate research, leading
to the writing of an S.B. thesis, to be arranged
by the student and appropriate MIT faculty
member. See department undergraduate headquarters.
J. E. Meyer
22.002 Management in Engineering
Prereq.: -
22.006 Computer Models of Physical and
Engineering Systems
Prereq.: 18.03 or 18.034, 1.00
U (Spring)
3-1-8
Engineering School-Wide Elective Subject.
Description given at end of this chapter in
SWE section on page 999.
F Peia-Mora
22.011 Seminar in Nuclear Engineering
Prereq.:
U (Fall)
3-0-9
Engineering School-Wide Elective Subject.
Description given at end of this chapter in
SWE section on page 562.
J.-H. Chun
-
U (Fall)
2-0-4
Surveys the range of topics covered by the
Department. Introductory discussion of the
basic phenomena of fission and fusion power,
and related aspects of reactor design. The
many applications of nuclear engineering for
research in biology, earth sciences, medicine,
and physics are discussed by guest lecturers
from the appropriate discipline. A demonstration of the MIT Reactor as a research tool is
given.
M. S. Kazimi, L. Porter
22.012 Seminar in Fusion and Plasma
Physics
Prereq.: -
U (Spring)
2-0-4
Lectures and discussion introducing the range
of topics relevant to plasma and fusion engineering. Introductory discussion of the
economic and ecological motivation for the
development of fusion power. Contemporary
magnetic confinement schemes, theoretical
questions, and engineering considerations are
presented by expert guest lecturers. Tour of
Plasma Fusion Center experimental facilities.
K. Molvig
22.013 Applications in Radiation Science
and Technology
Prereq.: -
22.02 Introduction to Applied Nuclear
Physics
Prereq.: 8.02, 18.02
U (Fall)
3-0-9 REST
Basic concepts of nuclear physics with emphasis on radiation interactions with matter.
Elementary quantum theory; properties of
atomic nuclei; natural and induced radioactivity; cross sections for nuclear reactions;
alpha-, beta-, and gamma-decay. Nuclear
models. Slowing down and diffusion of
neutrons. Nuclear reactions for fission and
fusion power. Current applications in nuclear
radiation science and technology.
L. Porter
22.021 Nuclear Reactor Physics
Prereq.: 22.02, 18.03
U (Fall)
4-0-8
Introduces fission reactor physics. Covers reactions induced by neutrons, nuclear fission,
slowing down of neutrons in infinite media, diffusion theory, the few-group approximation,
and point kinetics. Emphasizes the nuclear
physics bases of reactor design and their
relationship to reactor engineering problems.
Three lecture hours per week meeting concurrently with graduate subject 22.211, plus a
separate recitation; assignments and quizzes
are different from those in 22.211.
K. F. Hansen
22.03 Engineering of Nuclear Systems
Prereq.: 22.02
U (Fall)
3-0-9
Introduces nuclear engineering in radiation applications and power plant design. Basic principles of nuclear physics, reactor physics, and
environmental health physics; heat-transfer
structural analysis, safety, and waste treatment are employed. Each student analyzes an
individual nuclear engineering example to examine the application of different engineering
U (Fall) disciplines. The results are summarized in a
2-0-4
term paper and oral presentation. Lectures
A series of wide-ranging lectures examining focus on the case of a fission reactor, with emdiverse issues in current applications of radia- phasis on applications of engineering distion in industry, medicine, and environment. ciplines.
Typical topics: medical imaging, radiation can- M. W. Golay
cer therapy, neutron activation analysis,
neutron scattering and tomography, fission
and fusion reactors, transport and management of environmental pollutants and radioactive materials, computer modeling, and
simulation.
S. Yip, B. Rosen
Descriptions of Subjects 523
