School of Engineering
22.926 Environmental Applications of
Plasma
(New)
Prereq.: 8.03
G (IAP)
1-0-3
Introduces the concepts of plasma technology
applied to remediation and monitoring of environmental problems. As most environmental
applications involve the use of atmospheric
pressure plasmas, the fundamental concepts
of weakly ionized plasmas are covered. Plasma chemistry and plasma sources are
described. Thermal and non-thermal plasmas
and their applications for treating a variety of
hazardous materials are illustrated with a
description of several industrial examples.
K. W. Wenzel, E. A. Chaniotakis
22.928J Energy in Perspective
(Same subject as TPP.64J)
Prereq.: Permission of instructor
G (IAP)
2-0-4 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
An overview of energy production, delivery,
transformation, and end-use in their technological, economic, environmental, and sociopolitical dimensions. Special emphasis on the
following topics: greenhouse gas warming;
potential for more efficient use of energy;
renewable resources: how much and how
renewable; the fear of radiation, nuclear
proliferation, and the future of nuclear fission
power; technologies of the future, e.g., nuclear
fusion and the hydrogen economy.
M. Miller, M. J. Driscoll
22.93 Teaching Experience in Nuclear
Engineering
Prereq.: Permission of department
G (Fall, Spring, Summer)
Units arranged H-LEVEL Grad Credit
For qualified graduate students interested in
teaching as a career. Classroom, laboratory,
or tutorial teaching under the supervision of a
faculty member. Students selected by interview. Enrollment limited by the availability of
suitable assignments. Credits for this subject
may not be used toward Master's or
Engineer's degrees.
M. S. Kazimi
22.ThG Graduate Thesis
Prereq.: -
G (Fall, Spring, Summer)
Units arranged H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit
Program of graduate research, leading to the
writing of an S.M., M.Eng., N.E., Ph.D., or
Sc.D. thesis; to be arranged by the student
and an appropriate MIT faculty member. Consult Department Graduate Office
J. P. Freidberg
530 Chapter Vill
