Program in Writing and Humanistic Studies Course 21W
21W.739J Darwin and Design
(Same subject as 21 L.448J)
Prereq.: _
U (Fall)
3-0-9 HASS-D, Category 2
See description under subject 21 L.448J.
J. Paradis
21W.740 Writing Autobiography and
Biography
Prereq.: -
U (Fall)
3-0-9 HASS
Writing autobiography is used as a vehicle for
improving style and studying the nuances of
the language. Literary works are read with an
emphasis on different forms of autobiography
(essay, fiction, etc.). Class examines various
stages of life, significant transitions, personal
struggles, and memories translated into narrative prose, and discusses 1) what it means for
autobiographer and biographer to develop a
personal voice; and 2) the problems of reality
and fiction in autobiography and biography.
Students write in either or in both modes.
E. Ettinger Chodakowska
21W.742 Writing About Racial Issues
Prereq.: -
21W.746 Humanistic Perspectives on
Medicine: From Ancient Greece to Modern
America
(New)
Prereq.: Permission of instructor
U (Spring)
3-0-9 HASS-D, Category 5
For students with experience in nonfiction
prose and interest in the non-science side of
medicine. Advanced study of the art of essay
(form, style, techniques of persuasion) and
practice of that form. Students are required to
write substantial essays and to revise their
work. Students read and discuss the writings
of distinguished physicians from antiquity to
the late twentieth century.
S. Klingenstein
21W.747 Rhetoric
(New)
Prereq.:
U (Spring)
3-0-9 HASS
The issue of race has preoccupied many
writers both here and in the entire world. Students read William Faulkner, Toni Morrison,
James Baldwin, Bernard Malamud, J. M. Coatzee among others, and write about racial and
ethnic issues either in the form of biography or
fiction. Students may write short or longer
pieces. Their work is read and discussed in
class and, if necessary, revised, incorporating
comments and criticism elicited in discussion.
E. Ettinger Chodakowska
21 W.745 Advanced Essay Workshop
(Revised Content)
Prereq.: Permission of instructor
U (Fall)
3-0-9 HASS
Can be repeated for credit
For students with experience in writing nonfictional prose. Advanced study of rhetorical
strategies and techniques of prose style. Considerable writing and revision required. In addtion to analyzing the work of class members,
students read and discuss the work of distinguished essayists chosen to represent a range
of prose styles, subjects, and biographical patterns.
C. Wo/ff
-
U (Fall, Spring)
3-0-9 HASS
For students with a special interest in learning
how to make forceful arguments in written
form. Study of the forms and structures of argumentation, including organization of ideas,
awareness of audience, methods of persuasion, evidence, factual vs emotional argument, figures of speech, and historical forms
and uses of arguments.
S. Strang
Creative Writing
Introductory
See subject 21W.731.
21W.755 Writing and Reading Short Stories
Prereq.: -
21W.756 Writing and Reading Poems
(21 W.760)
Prereq.:
U (Fall, Spring)
3-0-9 HASS
Introduction to the short story. Students write
stories and short descriptive sketches. Readings from European and American stories from
the eighteenth, nineteenth, and twentieth centuries. Class discussion of students' writing
and of the assigned stories in their historical
and social contexts.
A. Desai, S. Alter, E. Cooney
-
U (Fall, Spring)
3-0-9 HASS
Examination of the formal structural and textual variety in poetry. Extensive practice in the
making of poems and the analysis of both
students' manuscripts and texts from sixteenththrough twentieth-century literature. Attempts
to make relevant the traditional elements of
poetry and their contemporary alternatives.
Weekly writing assignments, including some
exercises in prosody.
P. Alexander
Advanced
21W.757 Fiction Workshop
Prereq.: 21W.755
U (Fall, Spring)
3-0-9 HASS
Can be repeated for credit
For students interested in developing their understanding of the craft of fiction. Weekly
workshop discussions of students' work focus
on analysis of structure, style, and characterization. Emphasis on editing and revision.
Reading and discussion of nineteenth- and
twentieth-century authors, e.g. Babel, Carver,
Chekhov, Faulkner, Kafka, Orwell, Marquez,
Woolf.
E. Cooney, H. Lee, S. Alter
21W.758 Genre Fiction Workshop
Prereq.: A subject in writing short fiction or
equivalent experience
Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: U (Fall)
3-0-9 HASS
Students write stories in such genres as
science fiction, fantasy, horror, crime fiction, international thriller, and historical fiction. After a
few introductory lectures and short assignments, most classes are devoted to roundtable discussion of the students' work.
Enrollment is limited to 15 students.
J. Haldeman
21W.759 Writing Science Fiction
Prereq.: -
U (Fall)
3-0-9 HASS
Students write and read science fiction and
analyze and discuss stories written for the
class. For the first eight weeks, readings in
contemporary science fiction accompany lectures and formal writing assignments intended
to illuminate various aspects of writing craft as
well as the particular problems of writing
science fiction. The rest of the term is given to
round-table workshops on students' stories.
J. Haldeman
Descriptions of Subjects 519
