School of Humanities and Social Science
21 M.621 Theater and Cultural Diversity in
the US
Prereq.: -
UI (Fall)
3-0-9 HASS-D, Category 3
A study of contemporary North American
theater movements and selected individual
works that are organized around issues of ethnic and socio-cultural identity. Class lectures
and discussions analyze samples of AfricanAmerican, Chicano, Asian-American, Puerto
Rican and Native American theater taking into
consideration their historical and political context. Performance exercises help students
identify the theatrical context and theatrical
forms and techniques used by these theaters.
B. Cotto-Escalera
History and Theory
21 M.650 History of European Theater to
1700
Prereq.: -
U (Spring)
3-0-9 HASS
A study of the history of European theater practice and theory from the pre-Greek period
through the seventeenth century. Readings include representative playscripts, theories, and
criticism.
A. Brody
21M.651 History of European Theater 1700
to the Present
Prereq.: -
Acad Year 1996-97: U (Fall)
Acad Year 1997-98: Not offered
3-0-9 HASS
Study of the history of European theater practice and theory from the seventeenth century
to the present. Readings include representative playscripts, theories, and criticism.
M. Ouellette
21 M.653 History of North American Theater
Prereq.: -
U (Fall)
3-0-9 HASS
A study of the history of theater practice and
theory in North America from colonial times to
the present. Readings include representative
playscripts, theories, and criticism.
T. De Frantz
21 M.654 Selected Studies in Theater
Prereq.: -
Intermediate Subjects
21M.655 Script Analysis
Prereq.: One introductory subject in acting or
design
U (Fall)
3-0-9 HASS
Detailed study of selected playscripts for actors, directors, and designers focusing on structural, thematic, and aesthetic components, and
the problems of translating conceptual materia
to its active, visual life in preparation and performance. Students study three texts from a
range of periods and styles over the course of
the semester. The final project includes an
analysis of a fourth text of the student's choosing from the point of view of one particular field
of theater practice.
M. Ouellette
21M.659 Production Seminar
Prereq.:
U (Spring)
3-0-9 HASS
Focused study of a specific non-European or
North American theater, its practice and
theory. A semester's work may center on the
theater of a particular culture such as Asia,
Africa, Latin America, or particular theater
forms such as feminist, Afro-American, Latino,
gay and lesbian.
B. Cotto-Escalera
-
U (Fall)
3-0-6 HASS
Seminar pursues detailed study of a particular
playtext or theme and is related to some
planned production activity during the following
Independent Activities Period. Seminar activities may include guest speakers from
various disciplines who approach some aspect
of the playtext or theme from the perspective
of their fields; various theatrical practitioners;
and critical and scholarly presentations by
seminar members. Participation in the IAP
production is not required.
J. Sonenberg
21M.665 Contemporary Latin American
Theater
(New)
Prereq.: -
Practice Subjects
21M.700 Introduction to Acting
Prereq.:
Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: U (Spring)
3-0-9 HASS
Explores Latin America's cultural richness and
socio-political diversity through the work of
major Latin American playwrights. Students experience Latin American collective creation
methods through classroom exercises. Subject
is a blend of academic study and theatrical
play. Students have the option of doing reading and writing assignments in Spanish.
B. Cotto-Escalera
-
U (Fall, Spring)
4-0-5 HASS
Explores the actor's tools: the body, the voice,
the mind, the imagination, and the essential
self. Through studio exercises, students address issues of honesty and creativity in the
theatrical moment, and begin to have a sense
of their strengths and limitations as communicating theatrical artists. Provides an opportunity for students to discover their
relationship to "the other": in the acting
partner, the group, the environment, and the
audience. Regular readings in acting theory
also put studio work in context.
M. Ouellete, K. Mancuso, K. Dunkelberg
21 M.702 Voice and Speech for the Actor
(New)
Prereq.: 21M.700
U (Fall, Spring)
4-0-5 HASS
Can be repeated for credit
Concentrates upon freeing the natural voice,
culminating in the actor's ability to work in any
style. The whole progression of Linklater's approach to voice is taught. Taught by
Shakespeare and Company staff.
J. Sonenberg
21 M.704 Musical Theater Workshop
(New)
Prereq.: 21 M.700 or previous experience in
musical theater required
U (Fall, Spring)
4-0-5 HASS
Intermediate workshop designed to introduce
students to the art and technique of musical
theater performance. Movement, singing, and
acting are explored during the semester, with
a focus on the use of the body as an expressive tool. Builds on understanding of how musicals are composed and the nature of the
actor's contribution to this dynamic form.
T. DeFrantz
21 M.705 The Actor and The Text
Prereq.: 21 M.700 or permission of instructor
U (Fall, Spring)
4-0-5 HASS
Gives students who have begun the process
of bringing themselves to a dramatic moment
the opportunity to apply their skills to scripted
material. Studio work in this class further
develops the completeness, spontaneity, and
honesty of expression of the actor's body, imagination, and voice; it introduces written
material and the problems of synthesizing the
self, the moment, and the scripted word. Weekly rehearsals with a scene partner.
J. Sonenberg, M. Ouellette
516 Chapter Vill
