School of Humanities and Social Science
21 M.863 Advanced Topics in Theater Arts
Prereq.: Any two subjects in Theater Arts or
permission of instructor
U (Fall, IAP, Spring)
Units arranged
Can be repeated for credit
Opportunity for advanced study in theater arts
not covered by the regular subject listings. Includes experimental subjects offered by permanent and visiting faculty. Students seeking
an individual program of study with a particular
faculty member must also obtain the approval
of the Director of Theater Arts. Consult
Theater Arts Office.
T. De Frantz
21 M.871 Selected Topics in Theater Arts
Prereq.: -
Program in Writing and
Humanistic Studies
Consult Program in Writing and Humanistic
Studies Headquarters, 14E-303, for the most
up-to-date information about requirements and
subject offerings.
The subjects listed below are grouped in
the three major areas of the Program in
Writing and Humanistic Studies: 1) Exposition and Rhetoric; 2) Creative Writing; and
3) Science and Technical Writing. Within
each area, introductory and advanced subjects are offered. Introductory subjects are
U (Fall, Spring) designed for students with little or no exUnits arranged perience in writing; advanced subjects are
Can be repeated for credit designed for students who have mastered
the elements of sentence and paragraph
Opportunity for study of topics in theater arts
structure and wish to develop greater comnot covered by the regular subject listings, par- petence in one or more special forms of
ticularly experimental subjects offered by perwriting.
manent and visiting faculty.
Consult Theater Arts Office.
21 M.873 IAP Theater Arts Topics
Exposition and Rhetoric
Prereq.: Permission of instructor
U (lAP)
Units arranged
Introductory Opportunity for the study of theater arts topics
not covered by regular subject listings, including experimental subjects offered by per- 21W.730 Expository Writing
manent and visiting faculty. Students seeking
Prereq.:
an individual program of study with a faculty
member must also obtain the approval of the
Director of Theater Arts. Consult Theater Arts
Office for departmental form.
Staff
For individual research in Music and
Theater Arts, register for 21 M.UR or
21M.URG. For Music pre-thesis tutorial,
register for 21M.ThT. For undergraduate
thesis, register for 21 M.ThU. Descriptions
of these subjects can be found in the beginning of this section under 21.UR, 21.URG,
21.ThT, and 21.ThU on page 487.
-
U (Fall, Spring)
3-0-9 HASS, Phase One WRIT
For students who wish to write correct, clear,
and effective prose. Attention to constructing
effective sentences and paragraphs. Weekly
writing assignments. Students' writing is discussed frequently in class. Readings include
essays that exhibit a wide range of rhetorical
techniques. Satisfies Phase I of the Writing Requirement.
Staff
21W.731 Writing and Experience
Prereq.: -
21W.732 Introduction to Technical
Communication
Prereq.:
U (Fall, Spring)
3-0-9 HASS, Phase One WRIT
Students study the mechanisms by which fiction writers, essayists, and poets transform
their experience into scenes, voices, and arguments. Attention given to sentence mechanics,
paragraphing, punctuation, and word choice.
In weekly workshops, students present their
writing to members of the group, and extensive revising is required. Satisfies Phase I of
the Writing Requirement.
C. Sawyer-Lauganno, S. Alter
-
U (Fall, Spring)
3-0-9 HASS, Phase One WRIT
Students intensively review the elements of
sentence and paragraph structure; special
problems in organizing and condensing technical information; and strategies for writing technical descriptions, definitions, classifications,
and analyses. Other topics include writing to
different audiences and preparing brief
proposals, lab reports, and graphics. Several
short writing assignments, frequent revisions,
and two short oral presentations required.
Satisfies Phase I of the Writing Requirement.
E. Campbell, C. Sawyer-Lauganno
21W.733 Experimentation, Expression, and
Experience: An Intensive Writing Workshop
Prereq.: -
U (IAP)
3-0-6 HASS
Designed to allow students to base their writing on their own experiences and to examine
the link between experience and creative expression. Short readings, drawn from fiction
and non-fiction, serve as models, demonstrating how a variety of writers have translated
their personal experience into creative work.
Writing assignments (three short papers; one
longer one) are aimed at helping students express, in any prose genre, their own observations and experiences. Papers may be
submitted for Phase I consideration.
C. Sawyer-Lauganno
Advanced
21W.735 Writing and Reading the Essay
Prereq.: 21W.730 or equivalent, or excellent
writing sample and permission of instructor
U (Fall, Spring)
3-0-9 HASS-D, Category 1
Exploration of formal and informal modes of
writing nonfiction prose. Extensive practice in
composition, revision, and editing. Reading in
the literature of the essay from the Renaissance to the present, with an emphasis on
modern writers. Classes alternate between discussion of published readings and workshops
on student work. Individual conferences.
S. Klingenstein, K. Manning
21W.738 Words
Prereq.: -
U (Fall)
3-0-9 HASS
Designed to increase appreciation of the verbal resources of English and improve skill in
exploiting them. Considers such topics as the
historical roots of the modern vocabulary, specialized and technical vocabularies, socially
loaded language, the connection between
word choice and tone, words as symbols.
Regular written assignments stress the way
that ideas are shaped by words.
H. Ritvo
518 Chapter Vill
