School of Engineering
22.38 Probability and its Applications To Radiation Interactions and
Reliability, Quality Control, and Risk Applications
Assessment
Prereq.: Permission of instructor
G (Spring) 22.51 Interactions of Radiation
with Matter
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Prereq.: 8.05
Interpretations of the concept of probability.
G (Fall)
Basic probability rules; random variables and
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
distribution functions; functions of random variables. Applications to quality control and the Basic principles of interaction of electromagreliability assessment of mechanical/electrical netic radiation, thermal neutrons, and charged
components, as well as simple structures and particles with matter. Introduces classical
redundant systems. Elements of statistics. electrodynamics, quantum theory of radiation,
Bayesian methods in engineering. Methods for time-dependent perturbation theory, transition
reliability and risk assessment of complex sys- probabilities and cross sections describing intems, (event-tree and fault-tree analysis, com- teraction of various radiations with atomic sysmon-cause failures, human reliability models). tems. Applications include theory of nuclear
Uncertainty propagation in complex systems magnetic resonance; Rayleigh, Raman, and
(Monte Carlo methods, Latin Hypercube Sam- Compton scattering; photoelectric effect; and
pling). Introduction to Markov models. Ex- use of thermal neutron scattering as a tool in
amples and applications from nuclear and condensed matter research.
chemical-process plants, waste repositories, S. H. Chen
and mechanical systems. Open to qualified undergraduates. 22.52J Statistical Thermodynamics of
G. Apostolakis Complex Liquids
(Same subject as 8.575J, 10.44J)
22.39 Nuclear Reactor Operations and
Prereq.: 8.08, 10.213, or equivalent
Safety
Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Prereq.: 22.211 Acad Year 1997-98: G (Spring)
Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered 3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Acad Year 1997-98: G (Fall)
Units arranged H-LEVEL Grad Credit Theory of self-assembly in surfactant-water
(micellar) and surfactant-water-oil (micro-emulPrinciples of operating nuclear reactor systems sion) systems. Introduction to the theory of
in a safe and effective manner. Emphasizes polymer solutions. Introduction to scattering
light-water reactor systems with transient techniques - light, x-ray, and neutron scatterresponse studies, including degraded core ing - applied to studies of the structure and
recognition and mitigation. Consequence dynamics of complex liquids. Modern theory of
analysis and risk assessment. Lessons from the liquid state relevant to structured
past accident experience. NRC licensing and (supramolecular) liquids.
regulations. Demonstrations: operation of the S. H. Chen, D. Blankschtein
MIT research reactor; use of a PWR concept
simulator. Optional laboratory section involves 22.53 Statistical Processes and Atomistic
a project at the Nuclear Reactor Laboratory. Simulations
G. Apostolakis
Prereq.:
Numerical and Mathematical
Methods
22.45 Lattice Gas Algorithms and
Architectures
Prereq.: Permission of instructor
Acad Year 1996-97: G (Spring)
Acad Year 1997-98: Not offered
2-0-7 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Lattice gas algorithms are logical dynamical
systems that can accurately and efficiently
model a true continuum fluid. They provide fundamental computational advantages over floating point approximations to Navier-Stokes. The
advantages stem from the dynamical similarity
of the lattice gas system and a real molecular
gas. Subject develops the algorithmic basis for
the method, emphasizing the similarities and
differences with a real molecular gas. Computer architectural issues also considered.
K. Molvig, G. M. Papadopoulos, T. F. Knight
-
22.54 Nuclear and Atomic Collision
Phenomena
(22.113)
Prereq.: 22.101
Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: G (Spring)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Principles and applications of classical and
quantum theory of collisions. Detailed study of
two-body scattering, partial-wave and phaseshift analysis, time-dependent perturbation
theory, and the Born approximation. Irradiation
atomistics. Optical model of nuclear reactions.
Atomic stopping power. Thermal neutron inelastic scattering in condensed matter. Connections between diffraction and imaging.
S. Yip, X. L. Zhou
22.55J Principles of Radiation Applications
(Same subject as HST.560J)
Prereq.: Permission of instructor
G (Spring)
4-0-8 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Principles of advanced radiation source engineering, theory and computation methods of
radiation transport in bulk matter, and major
radiation applications in industry, medicine,
and scientific studies. Topics include radiation
processing, nuclear measurements, nuclear interrogation, radiation therapies, radiation medical diagnostics, nuclear analytical techniques,
and neutron scattering and NMR spectroscopies. Requires a term paper and presentation.
X. L. Zhou
22.56J Principles of Medical Imaging
(Same subject as 2.761J, HST.561J)
Prereq.: Permission of instructor
G (Spring)
4-0-8 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Principles of imaging methods using ionizing
and non-ionizing radiation and ultrasound. Emphasis placed on fundamental physics and
Acad Year 1996-97: G (Fall)
mathematics involved in image formation, inAcad Year 1997-98: Not offered
cluding basic interactions, data acquisition and
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
reconstruction. Planar radiographic imaging,
Statistical mechanics principles of equilibrium multi-dimensional tomography (X-ray CAT,
and time-dependent properties of condensed PET, SPECT), ultrasound, and NMR imaging
states of matter. Phase-space distributions, covered, with examples of specific medical aptime correlations functions, kinetic equations. plications.
Free energy calculations. Stochastic proces- D. Cory, D. Rowell
ses. Continuum and molecular models for
transport phenomena and phase transitions. 22.561 J Magnetic Resonance - Analytic,
Methods and applications of molecular Biochemical, and Imaging Techniques
dynamics and Monte Carlo simulations in
statistical physics and materials science. (Same subject as HST.584J)
Prereq.: Permission of instructor S. Yip
G (Spring)
3-0-12 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
See description under subject HST.584J.
B. R. Rosen
526 Chapter Vill
