History Course 21H
Middle Eastern History
21H.601 Islam, the Middle East, and the
West
Prereq.. -
U (Fall)
3-0-9 HASS-D, Category 5
Surveys the major political, socio-economic,
and cultural changes in the Middle East from
the rise of Islam to present times (A.D. 600-
1990), with special emphasis on Islam's encounter with the West. Examines the rise and
fall of Islamic empires, the place of Arabs, Persian and Turkic peoples, and minorities in Islamic society, scientific and technological
achievements and their transmission to the
West, and the impact of European expansion
after 1800. Considers contemporary crises
and upheavals facing the Middle East in light
of the historical past, including the Arab-Israeli
conflict and Islamic populism.
Staff
21 H.615 The Middle East in the Twentieth
Century
Prereq.: -
U (Spring)
3-0-9 HASS
Surveys major political, socioeconomic, and
cultural changes in post-World War I Middle
East. Investigates interwar independence
struggles against Europe, followed by the
emergence of American-Soviet rivalry,
nationalist movements, and the growth of
modern states and societies after 1945. Examines contemporary problems in historical
perspectives: Arab-Israeli-Palestinian conflict,
Lebanon War, oil and regional security, Iranian
revolution, Islamic movements.
Staff
21H.621 Nationalism in the Middle East
Prereq.: -
U (Fall)
3-0-6 HASS
The Middle East's experience with nationalism
in the twentieth century. Examines theories
and varieties of nationalism, imperialism, and
revolution. Focus on Arab nationalism: its
origins; character of independence movements; place of Palestinian nationalism. Comparisons with other nationalisms in the
developing world and in Europe, and with Islamic movements. Open to graduate students.
Staff
21 H.631 Palestine and the Arab-Israeli
Conflict
Prereq.: -
Comparative History Subjects
21H.905 Historical Fact, Historical Fiction
Prereq.:
U (Spring)
3-0-9 HASS
Looks at the history of the Arab-Israeli conflict
from the nineteenth century up to the present.
The role of ideology, political actors, social history, economic and infrastructural problems,
regional and international interaction is explored, as are the prospects for peace after
the September 1993 Accord.
Staff
-
Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: U (Fall)
3-0-9 HASS
Examines the way that written accounts of the
past reshape historical events by comparing alternative versions offered by historians, by contemporary observers such as journalists,
politicians, and social critics, and by novelists.
Consideration of the role of narrative in historical writing, the construction and identification
of facts, and the discrimination between fact
and fiction. Readings focus on the industrial
revolution in nineteenth-century Britain and the
end of the British Raj in India.
H. Ritvo
21 H.909 Modernity, Postmodernity, and
Capitalism
Prereq.: -
Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: U (Spring)
3-0-9 HASS
Examines definition of modernity. Considers
whether postmodernity is a continuation or a
break and examines the relation of both modernity and postmodernity to capitalism. Primary
and secondary readings ranging across history, literature, art, and the social sciences include Baudelaire, Nietzsche, Benjamin, and
Foucault. Inquiry made into topics such as
progress, the avant-garde, fashions, the city,
civil society, science, technology, the linguistic
turn, and fundamentalism. Students encouraged to prepare and present topics of
their own. Open to graduate students by arrangement.
B. Mazlish
21 H 911 Comparative Slavery
Prereq.: -
U (Spring)
3-0-9 HASS
Critical examination of slavery in a variety of
historical contexts. Ancient Greece and Rome,
North and South America, Africa, the Ottoman
Empire, and Russia are the main foci. Among
the issues considered are causes and conditions of enslavement, methods of domination,
cultures of resistance, abolition movements,
and emancipation.
J. Saillant
21H.914 The Last Hundred Years: Topics in
World History (Part 1I)
Prereq.: -
21 H.915 Notable Events of the Twentieth
Century and Their Images
Prereq.:
U (Spring)
3-0-9 HASS
Global history since 1945. Explores four major
themes and their interrelationships: 1) population and human settlement; 2) the political and
military balance of power; 3) the world
economy; and 4) global environmental change.
S. Coe
-
Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: U (Spring)
2-3-7 HASS
A study of four notable events of the twentieth
century in terms of the images they created.
Photographs, newsreels, TV news reports,
documentaries, propaganda films, posters,
paintings, and drawings illustrate the role of
visual imagery in communicating ideas and
emotions regarding these events. Analytical
and theoretical material dealing with the historical changes in images and their use
throughout the twentieth century is read in addition to historical materials dealing with each
event. Students undertake a term-long project
focused on the role of a particular visual
medium.
W. B. Watson
21H.926 Humans, Animals, and Machines
Prereq.: -
Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: U (Fall)
3-0-9 HASS
Focuses, by means of a historical and evolutionary perspective, on the effort of humans to
define themselves in comparison with (other)
animals and machines. Also, considers the
possibility of computer robots as a new
species. Explores these issues by using
literary, cinematic, philosophical, and historical
texts; for example, novels and science fiction
by Samuel Butler, H. G. Wells, and I. Asimov;
treatises by Descartes and Turing; various historical treatments of automata and industrialization; and films such as 2001, Blade
Runner, etc. Research by students on agreedupon readings and topics encouraged.
B. Mazlish
Special Subjects in History
21H.931 Seminar in Historical Methods
Prereq.: Two History subjects
U (Spring)
2-0-7 HASS
An overview of "great books" in history. Examines different types of historical writing:
political, social, cultural, demographic,
biographical, comparative. Focuses on texts
and contexts. Particular attention to works
which have broken new ground in terms of
their methodology and approach. Open to all
students, but required of history majors and
minors in junior year.
H. Ritvo
Descriptions of Subjects 505
