Program in Writing and Humanistic Studies Course 21W
21W.782 Science Journalism
Prereq.. -
U (Fall, Spring)
3-0-9 HASS
A practical introduction to the craft of science
journalism. Class discussion examines important issues in communicating technical information to the public, such as the relationship
among science, technology, and the media.
Presentations by professional science journalists are featured. Students write weekly exercises, some of which are submitted for
publication. Writing competence required.
B. Goldoftas
21W.783 Scientific and Engineering Writing
for Phase I1
Prereq.: -
U (Fall, Spring)
1-0-5 Phase Two WRIT
A modified version of 21W.780 designed exclusively for students who wish to complete
Phase II of the Institute Writing requirement.
Meets every other week.
C. Sawyer-Lauganno, D. Custer
21W.785 Communicating in Cyberspace
Prereq.: -
21W.792 Science and Technical Writing
Internship
Prereq.: 21W.780 or 21W.782
U (Spring)
3-0-9 HASS
Can be repeated for credit
Part-time internships in Boston-area media
and industries are arranged for students wishing to develop professional writing and publishing skills. Students planning to take this
subject must contact the instructor by November of the previous term.
J. Paradis
21W.793 Advanced Workshop in Scientific
and Engineering Writing
Prereq.: Permission of instructor
G (Spring)
1-0-5
Offers graduate students who have writing
projects under way an intensive review and
step-by-step practice in technical writing. Examines major types of technical documents
and reviews organization, grammar, style, format, graphics, and the scientific publishing
process. Writing and revising assignments are
adapted to the preparation of one or two major
documents.
J. Morrison
U (Fall, Spring)
3-0-9 HASS 21W.794 Graduate Writing Skills Workshop
Analysis and authoring of cybertexts. Games,
Prereq.: MUDs, World Wide Web home pages, multimedia essays, and other kinds of digital communication are studied in terms of traditional
theories of rhetoric to articulate elements of
the new cyber-rhetoric for digital/multi/hypermedia. Techniques of creating cybertexts for
the communication of ideas and information.
Study of the history and theory of contem- porary computer communication. On the basis
of this analysis, students design their own
cybertexts for display and discussion. No prior
knowledge of programming necessary.
E. Barrett
21W.790 Naturalist Writing
Prereq.: Permission of instructor
U (Fall)
3-0-9 HASS
Students write about nature in a variety of
ways, aesthetic and technical, in essays and in
technical documents. They study the responses to nature of nineteenth- and twentieth-century naturalists, such as Audubon, Darwin,
Thoreau, Lorenz, Carson, and Goodall. They
examine local publications and films of nature
societies in New England, the Northwest, and
the South, as well as such modern forms as
the environmental impact statement and the
technical report. Several short and two longer
writing assignments on general and semitechnical subjects.
J. Paradis
-
G (lAP)
1-0-1
Draft a thesis proposal, thesis chapter, journal
article, progress report, or specification, and
review basics of engineering writing. Sessions
cover the processes of organizing and drafting
professional papers, improving writing style, and revising documents. Students determine
own projects; each project increment receives
instructor's editorial suggestions.
J. Paradis
21W.798, 21W.799 Special Topics in Writing
Prereq.: -
21W.800 Practicum in Expository Writing
Prereq.:
U (Fall, Spring)
Units arranged
Can be repeated for credit
Primarily for students pursuing writing advanced projects with the assistance of a member of the Writing Program. Students electing
this subject must secure the approval of the
Director of the Writing Program and its Committee on Curriculum. HASS credit for Special
Topics subjects awarded only by individual
petitions to the Committee on Curricula. Normal maximum is 6 units; to count toward
HASS Requirement, 9 units are required. Exceptional 9-unit projects occasionally approved. 21W.798 is P/D/F.
A. P. Lightman
-
U (Fall, Spring)
2-0-4
Designed as a practicum tied to a specific introductory subject (e.g., 9.00, 17.115J, 17.241)
for students in that subject who wish to gain indepth instruction in written and oral communication. Weekly writing assignments,
frequent opportunities for revision, preparation
of oral and written reports, training in informal
discussion skills, and extensive peer review.
Assignments pertain to the class to which the
practicum is tied. Enrollment limited to 15 students per section.
E. Barrett
21W.801 Practicum in Social Science
Writing
Prereq.: -
U (Fall)
2-0-4
Designed as a practicum tied to a specific advanced social science subject for students in
that subject who wish to gain in-depth instruction in written and oral communication. Weekly
writing assignments, frequent opportunities for
revision, preparation of oral and written
reports, training in discussion and leadership
skills, and extensive peer review. Assignments
pertain to the class to which the practicum is
tied. Enrollment limited to 15 students per section.
E. Barrett
21W.802J Practicum in Engineering Writing
and Oral Presentation-Quantitative
Physiology: Cells and Tissues
(Same subject as 6.080J)
Prereq.: -
U (Fall)
2-0-4
A writing-extensive subject attached to
6.021J/2.791J offering an additional six units
of elective credit to students who undertake
written and oral assignments related to the
technical material presented in 6.021J. Frequent writing assignments, with ample opportunities for revisions and editing; frequent
opportunities for small-group interactions and
oral reports intended to promote discussion
and presentation skills. Each section limited to
fifteen students. This subject may be used to
complete Phase Two of the Writing Requirement.
E. Barrett, D. M. Freeman, T. F. Weiss
For individual research in Writing and
Humanistic Studies, register for 21W.UR or
21W.URG. For Writing and Humanistic
Studies pre-thesis tutorial, register for
21W.ThT. For undergraduate thesis,
register for 21W.ThU. Descriptions of these
subjects can be found in the beginning of
this section under 21.UR, 21.URG, 21.ThT,
and 21.ThU on page 487.
Please note: Philosophy subjects are listed
under Course 24, Linguistics and
Philosophy.
Descriptions of Subjects 521
