History Course 21H
European History
Topical Subjects
21H.401 Greece in the Fifth Century
Prereq.: -
U (Spring)
3-0-6 HASS
The political, diplomatic, and social history of
Greece from the close of the Persian Wars to
the end of the fifth century BC, concentrating
on the origins and course of the cataclysmic
Peloponnesian War between Athens and Sparta. Domestic politics on both sides and its relations with foreign policy: Athenian democracy
and naval empire; Spartan society and the
helot problem; war strategy and war guilt.
21 H301 recommended.
J. E. Lendon
21 H.403 The Roman Empire
Prereq.: -
U (Fall)
3-0-9 HASS
The Roman principate from its founding
(27 BC) to the beginning of the third-century
military anarchy (c. AD 235): politics under the
empire; the role of the army; Roman government and its workings; revolts; as well as the
economic, social, cultural, and emotional
bases of Roman rule. 21 H 302 recommended.
J. E. Lendon
21 H.411 History of Western Thought,
500-1300
Prereq.: -
U (Spring)
2-0-7 HASS
Examines the development of the western intellectual tradition from the fall of the Roman
Empire through the High Middle Ages. Basic
premise is that the triumph of Christianity in
Europe was not the inevitable outcome it appears from hindsight. Attention is therefore
focused not only on the development of Christian thought and practice, but on its challengers as well. Particular emphasis devoted
to Nordic paganism, the rise of Islam, Byzantine orthodoxy, indigenous heretical movements, and the ambiguous position of Jews in
European society.
A. McCants
21H.416 Living and Dying in Pre-industrial
Europe
Prereq.: -
21H.421 Introduction to Environmental
History
Prereq.:
U (Fall)
3-0-9 HASS-D, Category 5
Survey of the conditions of material life and
changing social relations in western Europe
from 500 to 1750. Subject covers the emergence and decline of feudal institutions, the
transformation of peasant-based agriculture,
living standards and the course of epidemic
diseases, and the origins of capitalist organization. Special emphasis placed on the study of
those factors, both institutional and technological, which contributed to the economic growth
and overseas expansion of western Europe.
A. McCants
-
U (Spring)
3-0-9 HASS-D, Category 5
A historical overview of the interactions between people and their environment. Focusing
primarily on the experience of Europeans in
the period after Columbus, the subject explores the influence of nature (climate, topography, plants, animals, and microorganisms)
on human history and the reciprocal influence
of people on nature. Topics considered include
the European encounter with the Americas,
the impact of technology, and the historical
context of the current environmental crisis.
H. Ritvo
21 H.429 Art and Society in the Dutch
Golden Age
Prereq.: -
Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: U (Spring)
3-0-6 HASS
Examines the emergence and flourishing of a
national Dutch culture in the seventeenth century. Employs both visual images and text in
an effort to uncover the nature of economic
values, religious ethics, and family life in the
Dutch Republic. Looks at the image of Dutch
society as depicted by such contemporary
masters as Rembrandt, Jan Vermeer, and Jan
Steen. Also looks to England for a comparative
perspective on the impact of commerce and
Protestantism on society.
A. McCants
21H.433 The Age of Reason: Europe in the
18th and 19th Centuries
Prereq.:-
U (Fall, Spring)
3-0-9 HASS-D, Category 5
A study of the evolution of European society
from the end of the seventeenth century to the
outbreak of World War 1. Its politics, the nature
of its social system, the workings of its
economy, and its intellectual accomplishments. Particular attention given to the
analyses made by critics and thinkers contemporary to the matters treated in the subject.
Fall Term: B. Mazlish
Spring Term: S. Coe
21H.437 Social History of Europe, 1789 to
the Present
Prereq.: -
21H.451 Spanish Civil War, 1936-39
Prereq.:
U (Fall)
3-0-9 HASS
Examines Europe as four macro-regions:
1) Britain, 2) the continental northwest, 3) eastcentral and Mediterranean Europe, and 4) Russia. Explores how differences in pre-industrial
societies and politics shaped the tempo and
character of industrialization. Examines social
origins of communism, fascism, and
democracy. Other themes include population
and migration, women and society, the family,
and the organization of work.
S. Coe
-
Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: U (Fall)
3-0-6 HASS
Examines how traditional conflicts in Spanish
society erupted into civil war, almost immediately provoking a worldwide response. Examines the consequences of the Civil War for
Spain and the rest of Europe. Special attention
to literary and artistic responses to the war.
W. B. Watson
21H.452 Anarchism
Prereq.: -
U (Spring)
3-0-6 HASS
Readings from classics of European and
American Anarchism. The study of anarchistic
and anarcho-syndicalist movements in Europe, the utopian anarchistic communities, and the
anarchist labor and feminist struggles in the
US. Examines all branches and versions of
anarchism, from radical individualists to collectivist communitarians, and various anarchistic
critiques of modern industrial society and of
the bureaucratic state.
W. B. Watson
21H.466 Imperial and Revolutionary Russia:
Culture and Politics
Prereq.: -
U (Fall)
3-0-9 HASS
Analyzes Russia's social, cultural, political
heritage, Eurasian imperialism, and autocracy.
Compares reforming and revolutionary impulses in the context of serfdom, the rise of the intelligentsia, and debates over capitalism.
Focuses on both historical and literary texts,
and especially the intersections between the
two.
S. Coe
21 H.467J Soviet Politics and Society,
1917-1991
(Revised Content)
(Same subject as 17.601J)
Prereq.: -
U (Spring)
3-0-9 HASS-D, Category 4
See description under subject 17.601J.
E. Wood, D. Woodruff
Descriptions of Subjects 503
