School of Humanities and Social Science
24.111 Philosophy of Quantum Mechanics
Prereq.: -
U (Spring)
3-0-9 HASS
Quantum mechanics is said to describe a
world in which physical objects often lack
"definite" properties, indeterminism creeps in
at the point of "observation," ordinary logic
does not apply, and distant events are perfectly yet inexplicably correlated. Examination of
these and other issues central to the
philosophical foundations of quantum
mechanics, with special attention to the measurement problem, no-hidden-variables proofs,
and Bell's Inequalities. Rigorous approach to
the subject matter nevertheless neither presupposes nor requires the development of
detailed technical knowledge of the quantum
theory.
E. Hall
24.113 Classical Film Theory: Problems in
Aesthetics
(Revised Content)
Prereq.: -
U (Fall)
3-0-9 HASS
Philosophical analysis of film art, with an emphasis on the ways in which it creates meaning through techniques that define a formal
structure. Particular focus on aesthetic
problems about appearance and reality,
literary and visual effects, communication and
alienation through film technology. In Fall
1996-97, meets with undergraduate subject
21 L.706 and graduate subject 21 L.906.
/. Singer
24.118 Paradox and Infinity
Prereq.: -
U (Spring)
3-0-9 HASS
Different kinds of infinity; the paradoxes of set
theory; the reduction of arithmetic to logic; formal systems; paradoxes involving the concept
of truth; Gddel's incompleteness theorems: the
nonformalizable nature of mathematical truth;
Turing machines.
M. Glanzberg
24.119 Minds and Machines
Prereq.: -
24.151 Introduction to Philosophy of
Language
Prereq.:
U (Spring)
3-0-9 HASS
Examination of problems in the intersection of
artificial intelligence, psychology, and
philosophy. Issues discussed: whether people
are Turing Machines, whether computers can
be conscious, limitations on what computers
can do, computation and neurophysiology, the
Turing test, the analog/digital distinction, the
Chinese Room argument, the causal efficacy
of content, the inverted spectrum, mental representation, procedural semantics, connectionism, the relation between simulation and
explanation, whether some aspects of mentality are more resistant to programming than
others.
A. Byrne
-
U (Fall)
3-0-9 HASS
Examination of views on the nature of meaning, reference, truth, and their relationships.
Other topics may include relationships between language and logic, language and
knowledge, language and reality, language
and acts performed through its use. No
knowledge of logic or linguistics presupposed.
J. Higginbotham
24.171 Introduction to Phenomenology
Prereq.: -
24.208 Kant
(Subject meets with 24.408)
Prereq.: 24.202
Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: U (Fall)
3-0-9 HASS
A thorough study of Kant's Critique of Pure
Reason. Special topics to be considered include Kant's notion of objectivity and objecthood; the unity of apperception; the criticism
of metaphysics; the role of reason in scientific
investigation. Meets with graduate subject
24.408, but assignments differ.
Staff
24.209J Studies in Film and Media:
Philosophical Themes
Acad Year 1996-97: U (Fall) (Revised Content)
Acad Year 1997-98: Not offered
3-0-6 HASS Prereq.: One subject in Literature or Philosophy
U (Spring)
The philosophy of Edmund Husserl. Readings
3-0-9 HASS
from Logical Investigations, Ideas /, Cartesian
Meditations, The Idea of Phenomenology. Dis- Works of film examined in relation to thematic
cussion on the concepts of intentionality, issues of philosophical importance that also
founding, phenomenological reduction. Survey occur in other arts, particularly literature and
of the development of phenomenology since opera. Emphasis on film's ability to represent
Husserl. and express feeling as well as cognition. In
G.-C. Rota Spring of 1996-97, meets with undergraduate
subject 21 L.706 and graduate subject 21 L.906.
24.200 Ancient Philosophy I. Singer
Prereq.: One Philosophy subject 24.210 Problems in the Philosophy of Love
Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: U (Fall) Prereq.: One Philosophy subject
3-0-9 HASS U (Fall)
3-0-9 HASS Study of Socrates, Plato, and Aristotle with
some attention to pre-Socratic philosophy Philosophical issues in the study of human
(e.g., Parmenides and Heraclitus), and Hel- bonding: e.g., types of valuation, the developlenistic philosophy (e.g., Cynicism and ment of ego ideals, and the relationships beStoicism). Examination of their views on tween love, desire, emotion, and reason.
ethics, politics, metaphysics, and the nature of Readings in recent philosophy and the history
knowledge, with special attention to how these of philosophy.
various thinkers formed part of a single tradi- I. Singer
tion of philosophical thought.
R. Wedgwood 24.211 Theory of Knowledge
Prereq.: One Philosophy subject 24.202 Modern Philosophy: Descartes
U (Fall) to Kant
3-0-9 HASS
Prereq.: One Philosophy subject Study of problems concerning our concept of
U (Spring) knowledge, our knowledge of the past, our
3-0-9 HASS
knowledge of the thoughts and feelings of ourPhilosophic thought in Europe during the selves and others, and our knowledge of the
seventeenth and eighteenth centuries. Em- existence and properties of physical objects in
phasis on epistemology and metaphysics. In- our immediate environment.
cludes Descartes, Spinoza, Berkeley, Hume, R. Stalnaker
and Kant.
E. Hall
24.205 The Good Life
Prereq.: One Philosophy subject
U (Spring)
3-0-9 HASS
Technical problems in modern philosophy dealing with the nature of happiness, self-fulfillment, meaning in life, the making of ideals,
and the pursuit of spiritual goals. Papers
based on the works of Schopenhauer, Santayana, Sartre, Freud, and others.
I. Singer
532 Chapter Vill
