School of Humanities and Social Science
21W.761 Mystery Writing
(New)
Prereq.: 21W.730 or equivalent
Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: U (Spring)
3-0-9 HASS
Aims to teach students to analyze and emulate
the narrative structures, compact fictional
worlds, and character dynamics that typify the
classic crime tale of ratiocination. Reading consists of one short text and a comprehensive
selection of classic mystery stories written by
such authors as Poe, Conan Doyle, John Dickson Carr, Agatha Christie, Josephone Tey.
Some writing assignments ask students to
analyze the assigned reading; even more ask
students to create some of the elements of an
original mystery - a time-line, a scene, a character, etc.
C. G. Wolff
21W.762 Poetry Workshop
Prereq.: -
U (Fall)
3-0-9 HASS
Can be repeated for credit
For students with some previous experience in
poetry writing. Frequent assignments stress
use of language, diction, word choice, line
breaks, imagery, mood, and tone. Considers
the functions of memory, imagination, dreams,
poetic impulses. Throughout the semester, students examine the work of published poets.
Revision stressed.
P. Alexander
21W.763 Modern Science Fiction
Prereq.: -
21W.765J Interactive and Non-Linear
Narrative: Theory and Practice
(Same subject as 21 L.489J)
Prereq.:
Acad Year 1996-97: U (Fall)
Acad Year 1997-98: Not offered
3-0-9 HASS
Students investigate novels, short stories, and
poetry from "the Golden Age" to "neuromantic"
science fiction: the 1950s to the present. Readings include The Stars My Destination, Double
Star, Neuromancer, and The Dispossessed,
as well as the previous year's Hugo or Nebular
Award winner. Students write their own works
of science fiction and submit critical analyses
of each other's efforts.
J. Haldeman
-
U (Spring)
3-0-9 HASS
Techniques of creating narratives that take advantage of the flexibility of form offered by the
computer. Study of the structural properties of
book-based narratives that experiment with
digression, multiple points of view, disruptions
of time and of storyline. Analysis of the structure and evaluation of the literary qualities of
computer-based narratives including hypertexts, adventure games, and classic artificial intelligence programs like Eliza. With this base,
students use authoring systems to model a
variety of narrative techniques and to create
their own fictions. Knowledge of programming
helpful but not necessary.
J. Murray
21W.766J Writing by US Women of Color
(Same subject as SP.443J)
Prereq.: -
Science and Technical Writing
Introductory
See subject 21W.732.
Advanced
21W.777 The Scientific Essay
Prereq.:
U (Fall)
3-0-9 HASS
Students read short stories by Native
American, Latina, African-American, and AsianAmerican women writers and write their own
stories and descriptive sketches. Discussion of
the following themes: the reclaiming,
reconstruction, and preservation of culture and
ancestry as sources of power and resistance;
storytelling and use of ethnic language as
means of survival; use of indigenous myth and
motif; shifting, contending, and multiple identities; and tensions between nationalist and
feminist struggles for self-determination and
self-definition.
H. Lee
21W.770 Advanced Fiction Workshop
Prereq.: Permission of instructor
U (Fall, Spring)
3-0-9 HASS
Can be repeated for credit
For students with some experience in writing
fiction. Concentrates on the ways an author
manipulates his or her audience in the creation
of a particular vision of reality. Studies style;
point of view; distinctions of time and space;
stream-of-consciousness; all the strategies for
making a work of art. Outside readings assigned on an individual basis.
A. Desai, E. Chodakowska
21W.771 Advanced Poetry Workshop
Prereq.: Prior manuscript submission required
U (Spring)
3-0-9 HASS
Can be repeated for credit
For students experienced in writing poems.
Regular reading of published contemporary
poets and weekly submission of manuscripts
for class review and criticism. Students expected to do a substantial amount of rewriting
and revision. Classwork supplemented with individual conferences.
P. Alexander
-
U (Fall, Spring)
3-0-9 HASS
Concerns the articulate expression of science
in a broad cultural context. The nature of the
essay and the special challenges of writing
about science are topics of discussion.
Classes are devoted to critiques of published
essays and student essays alike. Readings
are drawn from the essays of J. B. S. Haldane,
E. B. White, Stephen Jay Gould, and David
Quammen, among others.
B. Goldoftas
21W.780 Communicating in Technical
Organizations
Prereq.: -
U (Fall, Spring)
3-0-9 HASS, Phase Two WRIT
An exploration of the role that communication
plays in the work of the contemporary engineering and science professional. Emphasis
is placed on analyzing how composing and
publication contribute to work management
and knowledge production, as well as on the
"how-to" aspects of writing specific kinds of
documents in a clear style. Topics include communication as organizational process,
electronic modes such as e-mail and the Internet, the informational and social roles of
specific document forms, writing as collaboration, the writing process, the elements of style,
methods of oral presentation, and communication ethics. Case studies used as the basis for
class discussion and some writing assignments. Several short documents, a longer
report or article, and a short oral presentation
are required.
C. Sawyer-Lauganno
21W.781 Practicum in Science and
Engineering Writing
Prereq.: -
U (Fall, Spring)
2-0-4
Designed as a practicum tied to a specific technical subject for students in that subject who
wish to gain in-depth instruction in written and
oral communication. Weekly writing assignments, frequent opportunities for revision,
preparation of oral and written reports, training
in discussion and leadership skills, and extensive peer review. Assignments pertain to the
technical class to which the practicum is tied;
some assignments highlight organization and
managerial aspects of the technical project.
Subject may require use of the Networked
Educational Online System (NEOS). Enrollment limited to 15 students.
E. Barrett
520 Chapter Vill
