Program in Science, Technology, and Society STS
STS.525J Science and Technology in
International Affairs
(Same subject as 17.328J)
Prereq.: 17.302 or permission of instructor
Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: G (Spring)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
See description under subject 17.328J.
E. B. Skolnikoff
STS.528J Evolving Conceptions of
Systems and Self
(Same subject as MAS.714J)
Prereq.: -
G (Fall)
2-0-7
Examines how recent computational movements (such as Artificial Life, Connectionism,
and Virtual Reality) both reflect and contribute
to broader intellectual movements that are
changing the way people think about mind,
self, nature, and society. Issues include: computation and postmodernism, trends toward
decentralized thinking and notions of emergent
phenomena, changing conceptions of "real"
and "artificial," the growing role of biological
metaphors, and popular receptions of new
computational ideas.
M. Resnick, S. Turkle
STS.529 Representing Nature in America
Prereq.: -
Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: G (Fall)
3-0-9
An examination, in the context of the current
conflict between ecocentric and
anthropocentric approaches to environmental
problems, of the representation of nature in
America before the Civil War. Among the texts
to be examined are Shakespeare's The
Tempest, Jefferson's Notes on Virginia, Lewis
and Clark's Journals, Emerson's Essays,
Thoreau's Walden, and Melville's Moby Dick.
L. Marx
STS.532J US General Purpose Forces
(Subject meets with 17.483J, 17.482J,
STS.071J)
Prereq.: -
STS.540 Environmental Studies: Scientific
and Cultural Perspectives
(New)
Prereq.:
G (Spring)
2-0-7 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
See description under subject 17.483J.
B. Posen, T. Postol
-
G (Spring)
3-0-9
Graduate introduction to environmental studies
from a humanistic perspective. Examines the
relative merits and compatibility of polar conceptions of environmental degradation: at one
pole, scientists who locate the chief problems
in the biophysical realm; at the other,
humanists and social scientists who locate
them within culture and society. Readings include Glacken, Thoreau, Carson, Naess,
Worster, Commoner, Beck, Esterbrook,
Ausubel, Botkin, Global Change Newsletter.
Open to upper-level undergraduates with permission of instructor.
J. Conway, K. Keniston, L. Marx
STS.570 Identity and the Internet
(New)
(Subject meets with STS.065)
Prereq.: -
STS.ThG Graduate Thesis
Prereq.:
G (Spring)
3-0-9
See description under subject STS.065.
S. Turkle
-
G (Fall, Spring)
Units arranged H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit
Program of graduate research, leading to the
writing of a Ph.D. thesis; to be arranged by the
student with an appropriate MIT faculty member, who is the thesis supervisor.
D. Fitzgerald
Research
STS.901-910 Advanced Topics in Science,
Technology, and Society
Prereq.: -
G (Fall, Spring)
Units arranged
Can be repeated for credit
For students who wish to pursue special
studies or projects at an advanced level with a
member of the Program in Science, Technology, and Society.
Consult D. Fitzgerald.
STS.950 Research Designs, Strategies, and
Methods
Prereq.: Permission of instructor
G (Spring)
2-0-4 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
The design and execution of research in the
history and social study of science and technology. Readings of exemplary research studies
in both the social scientific and historical literature. Discussions emphasize relating specific
studies to more general or theoretical perspectives, choice of methods appropriate to the
questions being asked, and logic of explanation and interpretation. Students complete first
draft of an original research paper, review subsequent drafts, and complete papers by end of
the term.
K. Keniston
Descriptions of Subjects 561
