School of Architecture and Planning
MAS.718 Research Seminar in Learning
Environments
Prereq.: Permission of instructor
G (Fall, Spring)
3-0-3 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit
Presentations of research projects in learning
and epistemology; discussions of work in
progress; formulation of methodological and
conceptual guidelines.
Staff
MAS.731J The Society of Mind
(Same subject as 6.868J)
Prereq.: Must have read The Society of Mind,
permission of instructor
G (Spring)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
See description under subject 6.868J.
M. Minsky
MAS.734 Projects in Knowledge
Representation
Prereq.: 6.170 or equivalent
G (Spring)
3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit
Focus on building practical domain representations for intelligent systems and introducing students to a variety of representation
toolkits. Students gain sophistication in the
design and critique of representation systems
as well as practical skills in application
specification and interface design. Students
complete a substantial project involving representation, application, and interface components.
K. Haase, Jr.
MAS.736 Discourse
(New)
Prereq.: Permission of instructor
G (Fall)
4-0-8 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
How discourse works, with emphasis on the
structure of spoken and written discourse -
MAS.738 Modeling Adaptive Behavior MAS.815 Issues of Color in Media
Technology
Prereq.: One subject in introductory artificial
intelligence Prereq.:
G (Spring)
2-0-7 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Examines models, algorithms and techniques
for modeling systems that demonstrate adaptive behavior over short or long periods of
time. Topics covered include: adaptive behavior in autonomous agents, learning from experience, simulated evolution, social or
"cultural" learning. Three papers and final
project.
P. Maes
MAS.790 Special Projects in Learning and
Common Sense
Prereq.: Permission of instructor
G (Fall, Spring)
Units arranged H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit
Special projects on individual or group basis.
Registration subject to prior arrangement of
subject matter and supervision by staff.
Staff
Information and Entertainment
MAS.813 Structured Video Communications
Prereq.: Permission of instructor
G (Spring)
2-0-7 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Representations of motion picture information
and associated sound for distribution, production and interaction in a networked environment. Topics include 2-D waveform and object
based coding, three dimensional representations models, scalable imagery, intergration and extension of existing and emerging
picture formats and processing architectures,
and on-the-fly delivery systems. Discussion
will also address the relationship of television
to information infrastructures and societal interprimarily conversation, story, and news. Inter- ests.
pretation and generation of cohesive discourse A. Lippman
by humans, and how we can build systems to
interpret and generate cohesive discourse, MAS.814 Digital Image Processing for Hard
e.g., the main problem areas encountered in Copy
building dialogue systems, text generation and
Prereq.: MAS 510 or MAS 160 or 6.003 or per- interpretation systems, and conversational inmission of instructor terfaces of all sorts. Students read and discuss
G (Spring) current theoretical papers, and carry out a
2-0-7 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
series of on-paper and implementation assignments analyzing existent corpora, and An examination of the electronic processing of
problems and data brought in by students. In- images for hard copy and of the technologies
dividual final project. associated with document production. Topics
J. Cassell to be covered include two-dimensional Fourier
transforms, halftoning, digital typography, outMAS.737 Software Agents Seminar put processes, color, psychophysics, and still
image coding. Term paper or project with both
(Subject meets with MAS.334) written and oral presentation required. A
Prereq.: Permission of instructor reasonable facility with mathematics is asG (Fall) sumed. Open to qualified undergraduates.
Units arranged V. M. Bove, Jr.
Can be repeated for credit
See description under subject MAS.334.
P. Maes
-
G (Fall)
2-0-7
The technical aspects of color for use in practical applications of media technology. Color is
discussed from three distinct points of view:
human vision, visual processing, and digital
displays. Topics include: the production of
color, physiology and psychophysics of color,
the sensation of color, color systems, coding
and processing, color vision, rendering in
graphics environments, color as an interface,
semantics and aesthetics of color. Weekly
reading, lab work, and individual term projects.
W. Bender
MAS.825J Musical Aesthetics and Media
Technology
(Same subject as 21 M.580J)
Prereq.: Permission of instructor
G (Fall)
3-3-3 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
In-depth exploration of contemporary concepts
in music and media. Studies recent music that
uses advanced technology, and the artistic
motivations and concerns implied by the new
media. Practical hands-on experience with
computer music technology, with special emphasis on MIDI-based synthesizers and
samplers and real-time performance systems.
Term project required.
T. Machover
MAS.826J Projects in Media and Music
(Same subject as 21M.581J)
Prereq.: MAS 825J
G (Spring)
3-3-3 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit
Current computer music concepts and practice. Project-based work on research or production projects using the Media Lab's computer
music resources. Requires significant studio
work and a term project. May be repeated for
credit with permission of instructor.
T. Machover
MAS.837 Collaboration Between People,
Computers, and Things
(New)
Prereq.: Permission of instructor
G (Spring)
3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Explores aspects of media design that
facilitate dynamic interactions between:
1) humans and computers, 2) human collaborators, and 3) humans and physical/
virtual environments. Students investigate the
design space of media for seamless interaction using concept sketches, mockups, and
simple prototyping. Regular readings, papers,
and small projects also required.
H. Ishii
548 Chapter Vill
