Whitaker College of Health Sciences and Technology
HST.570J Biomedical Instrumentation HST.582J Biomedical Signal and Image HST.590 Biomedical Engineering Seminar
Electronics Processing (Revised Content)
(Same subject as 2.781J, 16.458J) (Same subject as 6.555J, 16.456J) Prereq.:
Prereq.: Permission of instructor Prereq.: 6.003 or 2.003 or 18.085
G (Summer) G (Spring)
6-6-6 3-6-3 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Introduction to modern computer-based in- Fundamentals of digital signal processing with
strumentation through a major bioengineering particular emphasis on problems in biomedical
laboratory project in which each student research and clinical medicine. Basic prindevelops electronic circuits, interfaces them to ciples and algorithms for data acquisition, ima microcomputer, and combines them to form aging, filtering, and feature extraction.
an instrument. Classroom material focuses on Laboratory projects provide practical exelectronic circuit elements, networks, signal perience in processing physiological data, with
and system representations, logic and digital examples from neurophysiology, cardiology,
design, elementary programming, and speech processing, and medical imaging.
physiological background. No background in L. Braida, B. Delgutte, A. Dobrzeniecki, J.
electrical engineering or programming required. Greenberg
S. K. Bums, D. Rowell
HST.584J Magnetic Resonance - Analytic,
HST.572 Future Medical Technologies Biochemical, and Imaging Techniques
Prereq.: Permission of instructor (Same subject as 22.561J)
G (Spring) Prereq.: Permission of instructor
2-0-4 [P/D/F] G (Spring)
3-0-12 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Helps medical and graduate students to
develop an understanding of the limitations of Introduction to basic NMR theory, including a
current technology and the problems of creat- quantum mechanical description of the NMR
ing new medical technology from research. experiment. Examples of biochemical data obRepresentative topics include drug delivery, tained using NMR summarized along with
biotechnology, and non-invasive diagnostic other related experiments. Detailed study of
methods. Students interact with their peers NMR imaging techniques includes discussions
and local research leaders in these fields in a of basic cross-sectional image reconstruction,
seminar setting, and are encouraged to image contrast, flow and real-time imaging,
generate their own solutions to the problems and hardware design considerations. Exdiscussed. Students may find this subject help- posure to laboratory NMR spectroscopic and
ful in evaluating possible theses. Open to ad- imaging equipment included.
vanced undergraduates with permission of B. R. Rosen
instructor.
J. C. Weaver HST.585J Biosensors, Signal Processing,
and Biomedical Applications
HST.573 Biological Control Systems
(Same subject as 6.566J)
Prereq.: 6.003 or 2.02 or permission of instruc- Prereq.: Permission of instructor
tor Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
G (Spring) Acad Year 1997-98: G (Fall)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit 3-3-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Application of control theory to the modeling Principles of measurements and instrumentaand analysis of biological systems. Dynamics tion, emphasizing quantitative modelling of
and system identification of compartmental basic transduction (sensing) processes, intermodels. Feedback, feedforward, adaptive, and action of sensors with biological systems (e.g.
optimal and fuzzy control mechanisms in human body, clinical specimens), and both funphysiological control. Oscillation, chaos, and damental and practical limitations on the signalcatastrophe phenomena in nonlinear biological to-noise ratio. Emphasis on modern signal
systems. Neuronal and neural network processing strategies involving intensive realmodels. Emphasis on mathematical analysis time computation as an integral part of the
and computer simulation with examples from a measurement process. Some background in
wide variety of biological and clinical applica- life sciences and electronics assumed.
tions. J. C. Weaver, S. K. Burns
C.-S. Poon
HST.586-589 Special Subjects in Medical
HST.575J Bioelectronics Project Laboratory Engineering and Medical Physics
(Same subject as 6.121J) Prereq.: Permission of instructor
Prereq.: 6.002 or 6.071 G (Fall, IAP, Spring, Summer)
U (Spring) Units arranged H-LEVEL Grad Credit
2-8-2 Institute LAB Can be repeated for credit
See description under subject 6.121J. Opportunity for group study of advanced subS. K. Bums, R. G. Mark jects related to the Medical Engineering and
Medical Physics Program not otherwise included in the curriculum. Offerings are initiated
by MEMP faculty on an ad hoc basis subject to
program approval. Prerequisites may vary by
topic; consult faculty at time of offering.
H. F. Bowman
-
G (Fall, Spring)
1-0-0 [P/D/F]
Can be repeated for credit
Seminars presented by HST graduate students, by prominent outside speakers, and by
focus groups of HST faculty and students.
Designed to provide students with a broad exposure to current research in biomedical engineering and medical physics.
M. L. Yarmush
HST.591 Biomedical Engineering Research
Seminar
Prereq.: -
G (Fall, Spring)
2-0-0 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit
Development of professional speaking skills in
the communication of research progress. Students present their research, emphasizing
clear statement of the goals, significance, and
current status of their work. Confidential, written feedback given by each member of the
audience. Required of all students affiliated
with the HST Biomedical Engineering Center.
J. C. Weaver
HST.595 Tutorial in Medical Engineering
and Medical Physics I
(Revised Content)
Prereq.: -
G (Fall)
2-0-0 [P/D/F]
HST.596 Tutorial in Medical Engineering
and Medical Physics 11
(Revised Content)
Prereq.: -
G (Fall, Spring, Summer)
0-2-0 [P/D/F]
An exposure to the breadth and depth of
biomedical engineering in the HST community
through: (1) detailed discussions of technical,
social, and ethical aspects of cutting-edge research and modern health care with HST faculty; and (2) visits to academic research
laboratories, clinical facilities at HMS hospitals,
and industrial sites involved in medical technology development. Topics to be covered include: tissue engineering, biomolecular design,
functional imaging, biomechanics, gene
therapy, cryopreservation, micromachines, and
minimally invasive therapies.
M. L. Yarmush, M. Toner
HST.598 Special Topics in Medical
Engineering and Medical Physics
Prereq.: -
U (Fall, Spring, Summer)
Units arranged
Can be repeated for credit
For undergraduates desiring to carry on substantial projects of their own choosing in medical engineering or medical physics. Work may
be of experimental, theoretical, or design nature. A project proposal is required at time of
registration.
Coordinator: E. G. Cravalho.
542 Chapter VIII
