Program in Media Arts and Sciences MAS
Perceptual Computing MAS.630 Advanced Seminar In Affective MAS.654 Cognitive Artifacts
Computing
(New) (Subject meets with 9.34J, MAS.234J)
MAS.622J Pattern Recognition and Analysis Prereq.: Permission of instructor
Prereq.: Permission of instructor G (Fall)
(Same subject as 1.126J) Acad Year 1996-97: G (Spring) 3-3-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Prereq.: A working knowledge of probability Acad Year 1997-98: Not offered
theory and linear algebra 2-0-7 [P/D/F] H-LEVEL Grad Credit Lectures same as MAS.234J, supplemented
Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered Can be repeated for credit by individual or group projects and additional
Acad Year 1997-98: G (Spring) readings. Stresses the role of external repre-
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit An advanced seminar on issues of current in- sentations in guiding thought and imagination.
terest involving computers which can recog- Term project required. See description under
Fundamentals of characterizing and recogniz- nize, express, and "have" emotions. Topics subject 9.34J.
ing patterns and features of interest in numeri- vary from year to year. Participants discuss the W. Richards
cal data. Basic tools and theory for signal current literature.
understanding problems with examples from R. W. Picard MAS.690 Special Projects in Perceptual
multi-media, environmental monitoring, comComputing
puter vision, remote sensing, medical and
MAS.632 Conversational Computer
biological image processing. Decision theory, Prereq.: Permission of instructor
Systems
statistical classification, maximum likelihood G (Fall, Spring)
and Bayesian estimation, non-parametric Prereq.: Permission of instructor Units arranged H-LEVEL Grad Credit
methods, unsupervised learning and cluster- G (Fall) Can be repeated for credit
ing, context-dependent methods. Additional 3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Special projects on individual or group basis.
topics from active research.
Interaction with computer systems by voice, in- Registration subject to prior arrangement of
A. Bobick, R. W. Picard
cluding speech synthesis, recognition, and digi- subject matter and supervision by staff.
tal recording techniques. Emphasis on human Staff
MAS.624 High-Level Computer Vision: interface design issues and interaction techniMethods and Models ques to successfully exploit the speech
(Subject meets with MAS.210) medium for computer applications, including
extensive reading from current research literaPrereq.: Permission of instructor
Acad Year 1996-97: G (Spring) ture. Topics include human speech production Learning and Common Sense
Acad Year 1997-98: Not offered and perception, isolated and connected
3-0-9 speech recognition, text-to-speech synthesis
algorithms, telephone technologies, parsers, MAS.712 Technological Tools for Learning
Meets with undergraduate subject MAS.21 0. and dialogue generation.
Additional attendance at occasional seminars C. Schmandt Prereq.:
is required along with a research paper or
project involving high-level vision. See descripMAS.641J Audio Processing by People and
tion under subject MAS.210.
Machines
A. Bob/ck, Staff
(Subject meets with MAS.241, 21 M.566J)
MAS.626J Image Representations for Vision Prereq.: Permission of instructor G (Fall)
(Same subject as 9.358J) 3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Prereq.: MAS.51 0 or permission of instructor
G (Fall) Lectures same as MAS.241, with additional
2-0-7 H-LEVEL Grad Credit readings and a group or individual project. See
description under subject MAS.241.
Natural and artificial vision systems begin by B. Vercoe
transforming an image into a set of representations, thus choosing the "languages" to MAS.642J Writing for Computer
be used at each stage of visual processing.
Performance
This seminar surveys a variety of representations proposed in the context of human (Same subject as 21 M.565J)
perception, neurophysiology, machine vision, Prereq.: MAS.641J
and image processing, and explores how G (Spring)
these representations can be used in such 3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
tasks as object recognition, image data comUse of current tools and techniques for creatpression, motion analysis, texture analysis,
ing audio soundtracks that can be synthesized
and so on. A reasonable facility with matheby computer in real time. Techniques of commatics and computation will be expected.
pact definition and efficient, global disseminaE. H. Adelson, A. Pentland, A. Bobick tion, such as via the World Wide Web.
Development and use of global standards for
MAS.627J Special Topics in Vision Science audio and music rendering on remote sites.
(Same subject as 9.359J) Participants are expected to create an original
Prereq.: Permission of instructor work, performed in at least three remote sites
G (Spring) to positive commentary, using the above principles.
2-0-7 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit B. Vercoe
See description under subject 9.359J.
E. H. Adelson
-
G (Spring)
2-0-7
Examines how new computational tools and
activities can help people learn new things in
new ways. Discusses theories of learning and
education underlying the design and use of
these tools, and explores how new tools can
change the ways people think about learning
and education. Special emphasis on "constructionist" approaches to learning (represented by
tools such as Logo and LEGO/Logo). Final
project involves the design and observation of
learning activities.
M. Resnick
MAS.713 Learning Environments
Prereq.: Permission of instructor
G (Spring)
3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit
Seminar to develop a framework for understanding the entry of new technologies - computers, video technologies, communications -
into the process of learning. Reading covers a
broad range of topics in human sciences, epistemology, and computer sciences; research
projects, either self-initiated or assigned.
S. A. Papert
MAS.714J Evolving Conceptions of
Systems and Self
(Same subject as STS.528J)
Prereq.: -
G (Fall)
2-0-7
See description under subject STS.528J.
M. Resnick, S. Turkle
Descriptions of Subjects 547
