Special Programs SP
Special Programs
Project Interphase
Program XL
Experimental Study Group
Concourse Program
Integrated Studies Program
Women's Studies Program
Edgerton Center
Project Interphase: Pre-Freshman Program XL Experimental Study Group
Summer Program
SEM.XL1 Program XL: You Can Be a SP.211 ESG (Experimental Study Group)
SP.100 Project Interphase Success at MIT Prereq.:
(Revised Units)
Prereq.: Commitment to register as a freshman in the Fall Prereq.: First-year undergraduate standing
U (Summer) U (Fall)
Units arranged Units arranged [P/D/F]
Enrollment by invitation only. An eight-week SEM.XL2 Program XL: You Can Be a
academic and survival skills-honing program, Success at MIT
Project Interphase is designed to enhance the Prereq.: First-year undergraduate standing
preparedness of underrepresented minority U (Spring)
students entering MIT in the fall semester. The Units arranged [P/D/F]
program has a dual focus: academic readiness
and general educational development. The pro- An academic enrichment program for first-year
students, XL utilizes the innovative and effec- gram involves calculus, chemistry, physical
tive small-group learning concept to enhance education, physics, writing, and supporting
academic activities, including small-group students' academic performance in calculus
learning. The students can earn transcript and science. Students meet in study groups of
credit for subjects taken in the program, some- five to six participants with facilitators trained in
times resulting in advanced placement in cor- effective classroom techniques and concept
responding subjects taken in the fall. Activities focus. The study groups help students to reininclude day trips to area cultural, recreational, force concepts learned in the regular curand business sites. Students participate in a riculum, and help them to gain mastery of
range of personal educational development concepts and problems that are often more
challenging than those dealt with during lec- seminars and activities designed to insure their
smooth transition to college life. The summer ture. The small study group format emexperience gives them increased opportunity phasizes the full participation of each student
to prepare for the rigors of an MIT full-subject with the facilitator acting as a guide. The
load. regularity of weekly meetings enhances the
A. P. French students' understanding of MIT's academic expectations. After the initial meetings, students
are encouraged to take more responsibility
and to lead the group in problem-solving sessions, which helps to maximize their own learning. Each study group meets for a minimum of
three hours each week. The meeting time is
set by the XL facilitator based on students'
schedules.
K. Manning
-
U (Fall)
Units arranged [P/D/F]
SP.212 ESG (Experimental Study Group)
Prereq.: - U (Spring)
Units arranged [P/D/F]
A flexible and individualized academic program for first-year students which utilizes small
classes, seminars, and tutorials as the primary
methods of instruction for the freshman curriculum. Credit available in subjects in biology,
chemistry, mathematics, and physics, as well
as several HASS and HASS-D offerings and
undergraduate seminars in a variety of areas.
Students have the opportunity in these subjects to explore areas of special interest to
them. Certain sophomore-level subjects can
also be studied within ESG, depending on student and staff interest. One or two subjects
may be taken in the regular curriculum in conjunction with work done in ESG. Staff includes
MIT faculty, instructors, graduate students,
and undergraduates who are interested in
teaching in a small and informal academic
community.
V. M. Ingram
SP.221 ESG (Experimental Study Group)
Prereq.: SP.211 and/or SP.212
U (Fall)
Units arranged [P/D/F]
SP.222 ESG (Experimental Study Group)
Prereq.: SP.211 and/or SP.212
U (Spring)
Units arranged [P/D/F]
Continuation of ESG for sophomores.
V. M. Ingram
Descriptions of Subjects 551
