School of Humanities and Social Science
STS.170 The Organization of Knowledge in
American Science and Technology
Prereq.: -
G (Spring)
3-0-9
The historical emergence of social and natural
scientific disciplines within the context of institutional forms. Considers the social and ideological structures designed to support, encourage,
and challenge scientific and technological innovations and ideas, including the government; the military; philanthropic organizations,
professional societies and trade groups; educational institutions; public interest groups; and
research organizations. Examines the relationship between intellectual and institutional life in
America since the late nineteenth century.
D. Fitzgerald
STS.175J Nature, Environment, Empire
(New)
(Same subject as 21 H.968J)
Prereq.: -
Acad Year 1996-97: G (Fall)
Acad Year 1997-98: Not offered
2-0-10
An exploration of the relationship between the
study of natural history, both domestic and exotic, by Europeans and Americans, and concrete exploitation of the natural world, focusing
on the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries.
Readings exemplify a variety of contemporary
sources, including formal works on zoology
and botany, travel journals, official reports, periodical literature, and agricultural manuals.
H. Ritvo
STS.190J Objectivity, Truth, and Scientific
Rationality
(Same subject as 24.809J)
Prereq.: One subject in history or philosophy
Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: G (Spring)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
See description under subject 24.809J.
E. Hall, J. Z. Buchwald
STS.1 95 Life Stories: Meaning and
Metaphor in 20th-Century Biology
(New)
Prereq.: -
Social Study of Science and
Technology
STS.301 Integrative Seminar in the Social,
Cultural, and Historical Studies of Science
and Technology
Prereq.: Permission of instructor for non-STS
students
G (Fall)
3-0-9
Sociocultural studies of science and technology, emphasizing interdisciplinary approaches
from anthropology, history, literature,
psychoanalysis, and other fields. Examples
from ecological and environmental issues,
molecular biology and immunology, and computers and information technologies. Topics include ethnographic techniques, sociological
questions about the role of science and technology in society, psychological questions
about objects-to-think-with, and the presentation of complexities in scholarly texts.
M. Fischer, S. Turkle
STS.501 Proseminar: Social Study of
Science and Technology
Prereq.:
G (Spring)
3-0-0
Examination of a number of the central tropes
of twentieth-century biology - e.g., life,
machine, genes, regulation, organization - in
their changing historical and social contexts.
How have these metaphors structured research, permitting the importation of social expections, while at the same time satisfying
multiple, sometimes divergent, explanatory
needs? To what extent have they relied on
available technology, with new machines
changing the meanings of life, machine, regulation, etc.? Readings include selected primary
literature alongside 1) philosophical readings
on metaphors in science and 2) various historiographic perspectives.
E. Fox Keller
-
G (Fall)
3-0-9
Intensive reading and analysis of key works in
the theory and methods of the social study of
science and technology. Aims at understanding the different questions and methods
social scientists have posed and used in exploring how social context and norms influence
the work of scientists and engineers. The
relationship of the methods used to the questions raised is studied. Implications for the
practice of science and engineering as well as
for further scholarly study of that practice are
explored.
H. Gusterson
STS.502J Proseminar: Social Theory and
Analysis
(Same subject as 21A.670J)
Prereq.: -
STS.510 Biotechnology and Society
Prereq.:
G (Spring)
3-0-9
See description under subject 21A.670J.
J. Jackson
STS.507J Introduction to Cultural Criticism
(Subject meets with 21A.671J, STS.059)
Prereq.: Permission of instructor
G (Spring)
2-0-7
Examines diverse examples of cultural
criticism by anthropologists, historians,
psychoanalysts, jourmalists, and cultural
studies specialists. Students sample a broad
variety of approaches to cultural critique informed by, for example, Marxist, feminist, poststructuralist, and psychoanalytic perspectives.
Key texts deal with topics ranging from media
studies and urban design to the classic
themes of race, class and gender. Meets with
undergraduate subject STS.059, but assignments differ.
H. Gusterson
-
G (Spring)
3-0-9
Examines biotechnology and genetic engineering in social, political, and ethical contexts.
Connects historical background with contemporary issues, relating medical, agricultural
and industrial applications to university education and research, funding of science,
academic-industrial links, and regulatory and
patent policies. Explores roles and responsibilities of scientists, ethical conflicts, and
public expectations and perceptions.
Evaluates professional, institutional, and public
policy alternatives. Topics include eugenics,
human genome project, genetic screening,
and human gene therapy.
L. E. Kay
STS.515 Epidemics and Cities
Prereq.: -
G (Fall)
3-0-9
Treats historical and contemporary issues surrounding epidemics in urban communities. Attention given to several major epidemics
throughout history, including: the bubonic
plague, cholera, and syphilis. Historical
analysis will serve as a perspective, examining
how effectively, efficiently, and humanely three
American cities - San Francisco, New York,
and Philadelphia - are confronting the AIDS
epidemic.
K. Manning
STS.516J Analysis of Strategic Nuclear
Forces
(Same subject as 17.476J)
Prereq.: -
G (Fall)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
See description under subject 17.476J.
T. Postol
STS.518J Gender, Technology, and
Computer Culture
(Subject meets with STS.060J, SP.480J,
SP.481J)
Prereq.: -
G (Spring)
3-0-9
Meets with undergraduate subject STS.060J.
Graduate students are expected to pursue the
subject in greater depth. See description under
subject STS.060J.
S. Turkle
STS.524J Science, Technology, and
Public Policy
(Same subject as 17.302J)
Prereq.: Permission of instructor
G (Fall)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
See description under subject 17.302J.
E. B. Skolnikoff
560 Chapter Vill
