School of Architecture and Planning
MAS.241 Audio Processing by People and MAS.390 Special Projects in Learning and MAS.450 Holographic Imaging
Machines Common Sense
(New) (Subject meets with MAS.854)
Prereq.: Permission of instructor Prereq.: Permission of instructor
(Subject meets with 21M.566J, MAS.641J) U (Fall, Spring, Summer) U (Fall)
Prereq.: Permission of instructor Units arranged 3-5-4 Institute LAB
U (Fall) Can be repeated for credit A laboratory-based exploration of the prin-
3-0-6
MAS.391 Special Projects in Learning and ciples, techniques, and applications of hologPrinciples of information processing by the Common Sense raphy as a 3-D image communication medium.
human auditory system, from detection of fre- Begins with interference and diffraction, and
Prereq.: Permission of instructor
quency, intensity, and spectrum, to the proceeds through laser off-axis holography to
development of their perceptual correlates as U (Fall, Spring, Summer) white-light "rainbow" and reflection hologUnits arranged [P/D/F]
pitch, loudness, and timbre. Machine models raphy. Term project required, with oral presenCan be repeated for credit
of the human auditory and musical experience tation and written report. Lab fee. Limited
using perceptually-based sensor and inter- Special projects on group or individual basis. enrollment with preference given to freshmen
pretor constructs, sufficient to enable Registration subject to prior arrangement of and sophomores. Meets with graduate subject
machines to experience sound and music in a subject matter and supervision by staff. MAS.854, but assignments differ.
manner related to our own. Exploring auditory Staff S. Benton
and music cognition with the aid of real-time
audio processors. Modeling musical common MAS.490 Special Projects in Information
sense. and Entertainment
B. Vercoe
Prereq.: Permission of instructor
Information and Entertainment U (Fall, Spring, Summer)
MAS.290 Special Projects in Perceptual
Units arranged
Computing
Can be repeated for credit
MAS.432, MAS 433 Graphics/imaging Media
Prereq.: Permission of instructor
Projects MAS.491 Special Projects in Information
U (Fall, Spring, Summer)
and Entertainment
Units arranged Prereq.: Permission of instructor
Can be repeated for credit U (Fall, Spring) Prereq.: Permission of instructor
Units arranged U (Fall, Spring, Summer)
MAS.291 Special Projects in Perceptual
Can be repeated for credit Units arranged [P/D/F]
Computing
Can be repeated for credit
Special work on an individual or group basis
Prereq.: Permission of instructor
combining research and projects of multidimen- Special projects on group or individual basis.
U (Fall, Spring, Summer)
sional graphics, typography, imaging, static or Registration subject to prior arrangement of
Units arranged [PID/F]
dynamic, 2- or 3-D, and audio in an intelligent subject matter and supervision by staff.
Can be repeated for credit
electronic design environment. Registration Staff
Special projects on group or individual basis. subject to prior acceptance of project, superRegistration subject to prior arrangement of vision by VLW staff. Completion dependent on MAS.497 Research in Media Technology
subject matter and supervision by staff. successful demonstration and documentation
Staff of semester's project. Prereq.:
Staff
MAS.440 Workshop in Elastic Movie Time
(Subject meets with MAS.848)
Learning and Common Sense Prereq.: Permission of instructor
U (Fall)
3-3-6
MAS.334 Software Agents Seminar
A workshop in methods for the design and
(Subject meets with MAS.737)
production of interactive multimedia. EstabPrereq.: Permission of instructor lishes the interactive system as an expressive
U (Fall)
and dynamically adjustable object. Considers
Units arranged
a range of topics including collaborative authorCan be repeated for credit ship, cinematic journalism, techniques of video
Work on an individual or group basis in the shooting and editing, and interface design. Stuarea of intelligent software which helps users dents work in teams of three or four to design,
deal with information and work overload. As- produce, and program segments of the colsorted readings from the literature. Students re- laborative publication. Meets with MAS.848,
quired to participate actively in the class but assignments differ.
discussions. Final project. Meets with graduate G. Davenport
subject MAS.737, but assignments differ.
P. Maes
-
U (Fall, IAP, Spring, Summer)
Units arranged
Can be repeated for credit
For advanced undergraduate research in
Media Arts and Sciences.
Staff
Graduate Subjects
MAS.ThG Graduate Thesis
Prereq.: -
G (Fall, IAP, Spring, Summer)
Units arranged H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit
Program of graduate research and writing of
thesis; to be arranged by the student with supervising committee.
MAS.510 Signals, Systems, and Information
for Media Technology
(Subject meets with MAS.160)
Prereq.: 18.02
G (Fall)
4-0-8
Meets with undergraduate subject MAS.160.
Requires the completion of additional advanced homework problems. See description
under subject MAS.160.
V. M. Bove, Jr., R. W. Picard
546 Chapter Vill
