Whitaker College of Health Sciences and Technology
HST Health Sciences and
Technology
For degree requirements, see listing in
Chapter VII under the Harvard-MIT
Division of Health Sciences and
Technology.
Students wishing to take HST.011-091 HST.031 Human Pathology HST.071 Human Reproductive Biology
must obtain permission of the instructor.
(Subject meets with HST.030) (Subject meets with HST.070)
Prereq.: 7.012 or 7.013 or 7.014, 8.01, 8.02 Prereq.: 7.012 or 7.013 or 7.014, 7.05, permisHST subjects numbered 011 through 300 G (Fall) sion of instructor
are scheduled according to the Harvard 4-4-8 H-LEVEL Grad Credit G (Fall)
Medical School academic calendar, which 2-4-3 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
is different from that of MIT. Students Introduction to the functional structure of norwhose graduation depends upon complet- mal cells and tissues; pathologic principles of Lectures, laboratory sessions, and clinical
ing one or more of these subjects should cellular adaptation and injury, inflammation, cir- case discussions designed to provide the stutake particular care regarding the schedule. culatory disorders, immunologic injury, infec- dent with a clear understanding of the physioltion, genetic disorders, and neoplasia in ogy, endocrinology, and pathology of human
humans. Lectures, conferences emphasizing reproduction. Emphasis is on quantitative
HST.011 Human Functional Anatomy clinical correlations and contemporary ex- analytic techniques and the role of technology
(Subject meets with HST.01 0) perimental biology, laboratories with examina- in reproductive science. The course also involPrereq.: Permission of instructor tion of microscopic and gross specimens, and ves the student in the wider aspects of
G (Fall) autopsy case studies emphasizing modern reproduction, such as prenatal diagnosis, in
2-9-10 H-LEVEL Grad Credit pathology practice. Enrollment limited. Permis- vitro fertilization, abortion, menopause, and
sion of instructor required. (Only HST students contraception. (Only HST students may
Lectures, detailed laboratory dissections and
may register under HST.030, graded P/D/F.) register under HST.070, graded P/D/F.)
prosections provide a thorough exploration of F. J. Schoen, R. N. Mitchell H. Klapholz, Associates
the gross structure and function of the human
body. Fundamental principles of bioengineering are employed to promote analytical ap- HST.041 Mechanisms of Microbial HST.081 Hematology
Pathogenesis
proaches to understanding the body's design. (Subject meets with HST.080)
The embryology of major organ systems is (Subject meets with HST.040) Prereq.: 7.05
presented, together with certain references to Prereq.: 7.012 or 7.013 or 7.014, 7.05 G (Fall)
phylogenetic development, as a basis for com- G (Fall) 3-6-4 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
prehending anatomical complexity. Correlation 3-6-5 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
clinics stress both normal and abnormal func- An intensive survey of the biology, physiology,
tions of the body; guest lecturers focus on cur- Deals with the mechanisms of pathogenesis of and pathophysiology of blood with systematic
rent problems in organ system research. (Only bacteria, viruses, and other microorganisms. consideration of hematopoiesis, white blood
HST students may register under HST.01(0, Approach spans mechanisms from molecular cells, red blood cells, platelets, coagulation,
to clinical aspects of disease. Topics selected plasma proteins, and hematologic malignangraded P/D/F.)
for intrinsic interest and cover the cies. Emphasis given equally to didactic discusF. A. Jenkins, Jr., L. Gehrke, W C. Hayes,
demonstrated spectrum of pathophysiologic sion and analysis of clinical problems. Meets
S. W Kennedy, Associates
mechanisms. Enrollment limited. Permission of second half of the term. Enrollment limited.
instructor required. (Only HST students may Permission of instructor required. (Only HST
HST.021 Musculoskeletal Pathophysiology_ register under HST.040, graded P/D/F.) students may register under HST.080, graded
(Subject meets with HST.020) C. Crumpacker /1, S. Miller, H. Simon P/D/F.)
Prereq.: Permission of instructor D. J. Kuter, /. Kuter, W. Aird, W. H. Churchill
G (lAP) HST.061 Endocrinology
3-0-3 H-LEVEL Grad Credit HST.091 Cardiovascular
(Subject meets with HST.060)
Pathophysiology
Growth and development of normal bone and Prereq.: 7.012 or 7.013 or 7.014, 7.05
joints, the process of mineralization, the G (Spring) (Subject meets with HST.090)
biophysics of bone and response to stress and 6-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit Prereq.: 7.012 or 7.013 or 7.014, 8.02, 18.03
fracture, calcium and phosphate homeostasis G (Spring)
Physiology and pathophysiology of the human
and regulation by parathyroid hormone and 3-3-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
vitamin D, and the pathogenesis of metabolic endocrine system. Three hours of lecture and
bone diseases and disease of connective tis- section each week concem individual parts of Normal and pathologic physiology of the heart
the endocrine system. Topics also include and vascular system. Emphasis includes
sue, joints, and muscles, with consideration of
assay techniques, physiological integration, hemodynamics, electrophysiology, gross
possible mechanisms and underlying metabolic derangements. Enrollment limited. (Only etc. At frequent clinic sessions, patients are pathology, and clinical correlates of cardiovasHST students may register under HST.020, presented who demonstrate clinical problems cular function in normal and in a variety of disconsidered in the didactic lectures. Enrollment ease states. Special attention given to
graded P/D/F.)
D. R. Robinson, W. C. Hayes, J. T. Potts, Jr., limited, permission of instructor required. (Only congenital, rheumatic, valvular heart disease
A. L. Schiller, C. B. Sledge, Associates HST students may register under HST.060, and cardiomyopathy. Enrollment limited. Pergraded P/D/F.) mission of instructor required. (Only HST stuJ. Flier, F. Wondisford, W. Kettyle dents may register under HST.090, graded
P/D/F.)
R. Cohen, W. Gamble, P. Saul, E. Edelman,
Associates
538 Chapter Vill
