Whitaker College of Health Sciences and Technology
HST.901J Health Economics
(Same subject as 14.21J)
Prereq.: 14.01
U (Fall)
3-0-9 HASS
See description under subject 14.21J.
J. E. Harris
HST.903J Health Economics Seminar
(Same subject as 14.286J)
Prereq.: 14.04, permission of instructor
G (Spring)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit
See description under subject 14.286J.
J. E. Harris
HST.920J Health Technology
(Same subject as 15.136J, 10.547J)
Prereq.; Permission of instructor
Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: G (Spring)
3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
See description under subject 15.136J.
S. N. Finkelstein, C. L. Cooney
HST.959 Research Topics in Medical
Informatics
Prereq.: -
G (Fall, Spring, Summer)
Units arranged [P/D/F]
Can be repeated for credit
Research methods and ideas involved in addressing the information needs of medical
education, medical practice, and biomedical research. Topics include clinical information system design, medical knowledge
representation, clinical decision making, cost
effectiveness analysis, image management,
software engineering, and evaluation approaches for information systems. Activities in
various research groups are analyzed, and
supplemented by readings and discussions. A
written proposal and supervised project work
are required.
R. A. Greenes, P. Szolovits, G. 0. Bamett,
M. C. Weinstein, S. G. Pauker
HST.ThG Graduate Thesis
Prereq.: -
HST.UR Undergraduate Research in Health
Sciences and Technology
Prereq.:
G (Fall, Spring, Summer)
Units arranged H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit
Program of graduate research leading to the
writing of a Ph.D. or Sc.D. thesis or to the HST
S.M. thesis; to be arranged by the student and
an appropriate MIT faculty advisor.
M. L. Gray
-
U (Fall, Spring, Summer)
Units arranged [P/D/F]
Can be repeated for credit
HST.URG Undergraduate Research in
Health
Sciences and Technology
Prereq.: -
U (Fall, Spring, Summer)
Units arranged
Can be repeated for credit
Extended participation in the work of a faculty
member or research group. Research is arranged by mutual agreement between the student and a member of the faculty of the
Harvard-MIT Division of Health Sciences and
Technology, and may continue over several
terms. Registration requires submission of a
written proposal, signed by the faculty supervisor. A summary report must be submitted at
the end of each term.
H. F. Bowman
544 Chapter Vill
