Program in Media Arts and Sciences MAS
MAS.838, MAS 839 Graphic Imaging Media MAS.853 Spatial Imaging Systems MAS.864 The Nature of Mathematical
Projects Modeling
Prereq.: Permission of instructor
(Revised Units)
Prereq.: Permission of instructor Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
G (Fall, Spring) Acad Year 1997-98: G (Spring) Prereq.: Permission of instructor
Units arranged H-LEVEL Grad Credit 3-2-4 H-LEVEL Grad Credit G (Fall)
Can be repeated for credit 4-0-8 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Surveys the technology of spatial imaging from
Special work on an individual or group basis stereoscopes to holograms, emphasizing un- Surveys the range of levels of description usecombining research and projects of multidimen- aided viewing systems, and explores the per- ful for the computer modeling of natural
sional graphics, typography, imaging, static or ceptual, technical, and aesthetic bases of phenomena, including: analytical solutions and
dynamic, 2- or 3-D, and audio in an intelligent satisfying three-dimensional image com- approximations for difference and differential
electronic design environment. Registration munication. Includes a review of the elements equations; finite difference, finite element, and
subject to prior acceptance of project, super- of imaging optics. Lab fee. Open to qualified cellular automata numberical models; and
vision by VLW staff. Completion dependent on undergraduates. stochastic processes, nonlinear function fitting
successful demonstration and documentation S. Benton and model inference. The emphasis is on the
of semester's project. practical implementation of these ideas.
Staff MAS.854 Holographic Imaging N. Gershenfeld
(Subject meets with MAS.450)
MAS.845 Special Topics in Cinematic MAS.890 Special Projects in Information
Prereq.: Permission of instructor
Storytelling and Entertainment
G (Fall)
Prereq.: Permission of instructor 3-5-4 Prereq.: Permission of instructor
G (Spring) G (Fall, Spring)
Meets with undergraduate subject MAS.450.
Units arranged H-LEVEL Grad Credit Units arranged H-LEVEL Grad Credit
See description under subject MAS.450.
Can be repeated for credit
Seminar explores approaches to repre- S. Benton
sentation for computer-assisted cinematic Special projects on individual or group basis.
storytelling. The relationship of the moviemak- MAS.856 Synthetic Holography Registration subject to prior arrangement of
ing process to form and content is analyzed. subject matter and supervision by staff.
Concepts of "expert editor" and "expert viewer" Prereq.: MAS.854 Staff
are introduced. Using sample material (a Acad Year 1996-97: G (Spring)
story/some footage), a constraint-based ap- Acad Year 1997-98: Not offered
proach to shot design and editing conventions 3-3-3 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
is considered, and symbolic representations An introduction to the synthesis of holographic
for story structures are evolved. Individual 3-D images from digital, video, and General
projects in content representation and tool photographic data, and their applications.
design. Limited enrollment.
G. Davenport S. Benton MAS.910 Research in Media
Technology
MAS.848 Workshop in Elastic Movie Time MAS.858 Creative Holography Workshop Prereq.:
(Subject meets with MAS.440) Prereq.: Permission of instructor
Prereq.: Permission of instructor G (Spring)
G (Fall) 3-3-3
3-3-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
An introduction to the history, methods, and
Meets with undergraduate subject MAS.440. aesthetics of holographic image making. StuSee description under subject MAS.440. dents create holograms in the lab on a weekly
G. Davenport basis, learning to use holography as a medium
of expression and as a tool for the investigaMAS.849 Special Topics in Multimedia tion of three-dimensional ideas in design, arProduction chitecture, environmental design, and
engineering studies. Lab fee. Limited enrollPrereq.: Permission of instructor
ment.
G (Fall, Spring)
B. Connors
Units arranged H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit
MAS.862 The Physics of Information
Individual or group work of advanced and ex- Technology
perimental scope. Registration contingent (Revised Units)
upon prior determination of subject matter and
plan for treatment, as well as arrangement for Prereq.: Permission of instructor
staff supervision and project funding. G (Spring)
G. Davenport 4-0-8
Familiar devices such as computers and
telephones that collect, store, manipulate,
transmit, and present information operate near
many fundamental physical limits. Subject
studies the relationship between their design
and the underlying physical principles, in order
to understand how they operate, what their
limits are, and how they can be improved. Assumes a general physics background.
N. Gershenfeld
-
G (Fall, Spring, Summer)
Units arranged H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit
For research assistants in Media Arts and
Sciences, where the assigned research is approved for academic credit by the Department.
S. Benton
MAS.912 Teaching in Media Arts and
Sciences
Prereq.: -
G (Fall, Spring)
Units arranged [P/D/F]
Can be repeated for credit
Laboratory, tutorial, or classroom teaching
under the supervision of a Media Arts and
Sciences faculty member. Students selected
by interview. Enrollment is limited by the
availability of suitable teaching assignments.
Staff
Descriptions of Subjects 549
