ROTC Programs
Naval Science
NS.101 Introduction to Naval Science
Prereq.: -
U (Fall)
2-0-1
General introduction to seapower and the
naval service. An overview of the organization
and historical development of the US Navy
and its personnel and equipment. Covers the
basic tenets of naval courtesy and customs,
discipline, and leadership, as well as the major
challenges facing today's Naval officer.
Staff
NS.102 Naval Ships Systems1
Prereq.: -
U (Spring)
3-0-3
Lecture series on technological fundamentals
of applied and planned Naval Ships Systems
from an engineering viewpoint. Topics:
stability, propulsion, ship control and systems.
T. D. Sperry
NS.201 Naval Weapons Systems'
Prereq.: 8.01, 18.02 recommended
U (Fall)
3-0-3
Overview of the properties and behavior of
electromagnetic radiation pertaining to
maritime applications. Topics: communications, radar detection, electrooptics, tracking
and guidance systems. Sonar and computercontrolled systems also discussed. Examples
taken from systems found on naval ships and
aircraft. Selected readings on naval weapons
and fire control systems.
T. D. Sperry
NS.202 Seapower and Maritime Affairs
Prereq.: -
NS.301 Coastal Piloting and Celestial NS.410 Evolution of Amphibious Warfare
Navigation'
Prereq.:
Prereq.: Recommended second class cruise
U (Fall)
2-2-4
Comprehensive study of the theory, principles,
and procedures of piloting and celestial navigation, including mathematics of navigation, practical work involving navigational instruments,
sight reduction by pro forma and computerized
methods, charts, publications, and voyage
planning.
M. Kosnar
NS.302 Navigation and Naval Operations
Prereq.: Recommended second class cruise
and NS.301
U (Spring)
3-0-3
Comprehensive study of tactical and strategic
considerations to the employment of naval forces, including communications, tactical formations and dispositions, relative motion,
maneuvering board, and nautical rules of the
road.
M. Kosnar
NS.401 Leadership and Management I
Prereq.: NS.101
U (Fall)
3-0-3
A comprehensive study of organizational behavior and management in the context of the
naval organization. Topics include a survey of
management functions and skills including
planning, communications, team building, and
decision making. Explores ethics and total
quality leadership methods. An overview of
naval administration is included. Behavioral
theories and their practical applications are explored by use of experimental exercises, case
studies, and discussion.
L. Fisher
U (Spring)
2-0-2 NS.402 Leadership and Management I
Prereq.: First class cruise/NS.401
Discussion of the history of seapower, the role
of various warfare components of the Navy in U (Spring)
2-0-2
supporting the Navy's mission, and implementation of seapower as an instrument of national A seminar which analyzes ethical decision
policy. making and leadership principles. Provides a
Staff basic background in the duties and responsibilities of a junior division and watch officer;
strong emphasis on the junior officer's responsibilities in training, counseling, and career
development. Student familiarization with
equal opportunity and drug/alcohol rehabilitation programs. Principles of leadership reinforced through leadership case studies.
M. L. McHugh
-
Acad Year 1996-97: U (Fall)
Acad Year 1997-98: Not offered
2-0-4
Historical and tactical analysis of amphibious
warfare. Seeks to define the concept, explore
its doctrinal origins, and trace its evolution as
an element of naval policy during the twentieth
century. Case study approach used to provide
the prospective Marine Corps officer with the
fundamentals of amphibious tactics.
D. S. Rogers
1This subject is normally conducted in conjunction with an MIT
credit-bearing seminar. Tufts ROTC students can only register
under this ROTC subject number; MIT students must register
under the associated MIT seminar number; Harvard and
wellesley students can register under either number. Any
technical aspects of the subject matter of interest only to
midshipmen are covered in separate NROTC sessions and
field trips.
570 Chapter VIII
