Whitaker College of Health Sciences and Technology
HST.191 Statistical Planning and Analysis
of Biomedical Investigations
(Subject meets with HST.190)
Prereq.: 18.02
G (IAP)
3-0-3 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Introduces statistical logic and technique as a
basis for clinical decisions and scientific inference. Students learn to perform elementary
statistical calculations and acquire the concepts and vocabulary to read biomedical literature critically and communicate productively
with statistical professionals. Includes probability theory, normal sampling, chi-square and
t-tests, analysis of variance, linear regression,
and survival analysis. Case studies include applications to diagnostic screening, clinical drug
trials, and physiological experiments. Emphasis on experimental studies rather than
epidemiology. (Only HST students may
register under HST.190, graded P/D/F.)
D. Finkelstein
HST.1 96 Teaching Health Sciences and
Technology
Prereq.: --
G (Fall, Spring, Summer)
Units arranged [P/DIF]
Can be repeated for credit
For teaching assistants in HST where the
teaching assignment is approved for academic
credit by the Department.
M. L. Gray
HST.198 Special Topics in Health Sciences
and Technology
Prereq. -
HST.200 Introduction to Clinical HST.220 Introduction to the Care of Patients
Medicine
Prereq.:
Prereq.: Permission of instructor
G (Spring)
9-25-12 [P/D/F] H-LEVEL Grad Credit
February through May, Monday, Wednesday,
Friday. Students learn the basic skills involved
in examination of the patient and are introduced to history taking and patient interview.
Students exposed to clinical problems in
medicine, surgery, and pediatrics in groups of
two or three students under one faculty member. Findings reported through history taking
and oral presentation of the cases to the class.
An intensive subject serving as prerequisite to
clinical clerkships. Enrollment limited to students in M.D. Program.
W. H. Churchill, M. Donaldson, S. Kohler,
Associates
HST.201 Introduction to Clinical Medicine
and Medical Engineering I
Prereq.: HST.01 1, HST.031, HST.091,
HST.101, HST.1 11, HST.131, 7.05
G (IAP)
0-20-0 [P/D/F] H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Required for doctoral students in MEMP program. Students 1) develop skill in patient interviewing and physical examination; 2) become
proficient at organizing and communicating
clinical information in both written and oral
forms; 3) begin integrating history, physical,
and laboratory data with pathophysiologic principles; and 4) become familiar with the clinical
decision-making process and broad economic,
ethical, and sociological issues involved in
patient care. Permission of instructor required.
R. G. Mark, C. J. Hatem, E. Spar
G (Fall, Spring, Summer)
Units arranged H-LEVEL Grad Credit
HST.202 Introduction to Clinical Medicine
Can be repeated for credit
and Medical Engineering 11
Opportunity for study of graduate-level topics
Prereq.: HST.201
related to HST but not included elsewhere in
G (Spring) the catalogue. Registration under this subject
0-20-0 [P/D/F] H-LEVEL Grad Credit
normally used for situations involving individual
study under supervision of a faculty member, Strengthens the skills developed in HST.201
but may, when appropriate, be used for small through a six-week clerkship in medicine at
study groups. Normal registration is for 12 Mount Auburn Hospital. Students serve as fullunits. Registration is subject to the approval of time members of a ward team and participate
the professor in charge. in longitudinal patient care. In addition, stuR. G. Mark dents participate in regularly scheduled teaching conferences focused on principles of
HST.199 Research in Health Sciences and patient management.
Technology E. Spar, C. J. Hatem, R. G. Mark, Associates
Prereq.: Permission of instructor HST.203 Clinical Experience in Medical
G (Fall, Spring, Summer)
Engineering and Medical Physics
Units arranged [P/D/FI
Can be repeated for credit Prereq.: HST.201, HST.202
G (Fall, Spring, Summer)
For research assistants in HST where the as-
0-12-0 [P/D/F] H-LEVEL Grad Credit
signed research is approved for academic
credit by the Department. Hours are arranged An individually arranged full-time one-month
with research supervisor. directed study in a clinical environment where
A. D. D'Andrea, G. Daley active medical engineering/medical physics investigation is in progress. Students are actively engaged in patient care, particularly those
aspects that interface closely with technology.
Students also focus on in-depth exploration of
the technical and research area. Term paper
required.
W. C. Hayes
-
G (Fall, Spring)
2-0-2 [P/D/F] H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Elective subject for HST/MD candidates only.
Year-long subject: students must register for
both Fall and Spring terms. Provides an introduction to the care of patients through opportunities to observe and participate in
doctor-patient interaction in an outpatient, office-based environment and through patientoriented seminars. Students are exposed to
some of the practical realities of providing
patient care. Topics covered include basic interviewing, issues of ethics and confidentiality,
and other aspects of the doctor-patient relationship. Requirements include regular attendance, and a short paper on patient care.
Enrollment limited to 15.
W. M. Kettyle, A. N. Weinberg, MIT Medical
Department Staff
HST.230 Real Medicine
Prereq.: Permission of instructor
G (Fall, IAP, Spring, Summer)
1-3-2 [P/D/F] H-LEVEL Grad Credit
An elective subject for HST/MD candidates
only. Students form a group medical practice
and participate in the longitudinal management
of medically fragile patients. Under the supervision of physician-preceptors, students
regularly visit patients at home and in the
hospital, and address relevant medical, ethical,
financial, and organizational issues. Students
begin the subject in the fall of the second year
of the MD curriculum and are expected to continue the subject for a minimum of one year.
C. DuBeau, R. Mark, P. McArdle, Associates
HST.240 Physician/Scientist
Preceptorship
Prereq.: Clerkships in medicine and surgery
G (Fall, Spring, Summer)
0-20-20 [P/D/F] H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Two-month course required for all HST/MD students. Students learn both the fundamental
clinical principles and practices of a medical or
surgical subspecialty and are exposed to a related area of research in sufficient detail to understand the issues and methods of
cutting-edge research. Half devoted to clinical
experiences; the other half to scholarly work in
basic or clinical science. Arranged individually
by the students.
E. Edelman
540 Chapter Vill
