Division of Health Sciences and Technology HST
HST.599 Special Topics in Medical HST.720 Physiology of the Ear HST.780-789 Special Subjects in the
Engineering and Medical Physics Speech and Hearing Sciences
Prereq.: HST.718, HST.714J
(New)
Prereq.: Permission of instructor G (Spring)
G (Fall, Spring, Summer) 4-0-8 H-LEVEL Grad Credit Prereq.: Permission of instructor
Units arranged H-LEVEL Grad Credit G (Fall, IAP, Spring, Summer)
Physiological mechanisms underlying the
Can be repeated for credit Units arranged H-LEVEL Grad Credit
transmission and processing of signals in the
Can be repeated for credit
Assigned reading or research on special topics auditory periphery. Topics include comparative
in theoretical, experimental, or clinical aspects anatomy; acoustics, mechanics, and Opportunity for group study of advanced subof medical engineering and medical physics. hydrodynamics of sound transmission; physiol- jects related to the Speech and Hearing ScienArranged on individual basis with instructor. A ogy of transduction and synaptic transmission; ces not otherwise included in the curriculum.
project proposal is required at time of registra- neural coding of simple and complex sounds; Offerings initiated by members of the SHS
tion. Approval of coordinator required. feedback control; and the physiological bases faculty on an ad hoc basis subject to program
Coordinator: M. L. Gray. for hearing disorders. Emphasis on experimen- approval. Prerequisites may vary by topic; contal observations, theories, quantitative models, sult faculty at time of offering.
HST.710J Speech Communication and clinical relevance. L. D. Braida
M. C. Liberman, D. Freeman, Staff
(Same subject as 6.541J, 24.968J)
HST.790 Research Approaches to Speech
Prereq.: Permission of instructor
HST.722 Brain Mechanisms for Hearing and and Hearing
G (Spring)
Speech
3-1-8 H-LEVEL Grad Credit Prereq.: 6.021J or 6.501 or 7.20 or 9.00
Prereq.: HST.720 G (Spring)
See description under subject 6.541J.
G (Fall) 6-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
K. N. Stevens, S. J. Keyser 4-0-8 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Methods and ideas in research on speech and
HST.712J Laboratory on the Physiology, The anatomy and physiology of the central hearing. Approaches and techniques of
Acoustics, and Perception of Speech nervous system relevant to speech and hear- various research groups are analyzed. Reading. Specific topics include: the anatomy, con- ings and discussions illustrate how knowledge
(Same subject as 6.542J, 24.966J) nections, neurochemistry and single-neuron has been gained in the speech and hearing
Prereq.: Permission of instructor physiology of the brainstem auditory system in- sciences. Professional responsibilities of scienAcad Year 1996-97: Not offered cluding the feedback control systems; the tists and issues such as standards for conductAcad Year 1997-98: G (Fall) midbrain and forebrain auditory system; ing research, integrity in science, criteria for
2-2-8 H-LEVEL Grad Credit auditory evoked potentials; motor control and human and animal studies are examined in
See description under subject 6.542J. the control of the muscles of speech; cortical detail. A written research proposal is required
K. N. Stevens, J. S. Perkell, S. Shattuck-Huf- representation of speech and language func- of each student.
nagel tion. N. Y. S. Kiang, Staff
J. J. Guinan, Jr., M. C. Brown
HST.714J Acoustics of Speech and HST.791 Speech and Hearing Laboratory
Hearing HST.724 Clinical Aspects of Speech and Visits
Hearing
(Same subject as 6.551J) Prereq.:
Prereq.: 8.03 and 6.003 or permission of in- Prereq.: HST.714J, HST.718, HST.720, and
structor HST.722
G (Fall) G (Spring)
4-2-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit 12-0-12 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
See description under subject 6.551J. Clinical approaches to speech and hearing
W T. Peake, J. J. Rosowski, problems. Lectures, discussion sessions, and
W. M. Rabinowitz, K. N. Stevens presentations of patients by otolaryngologists,
audiologists, speech clinicians, pathologists,
rehabilitation specialists, and bioengineers.
HST.716J Signal Processing by the Auditory
Principles of clinical research.
System: Perception
J. B. Nadol, Staff
(Same subject as 6.552J)
Prereq.: 6.003; 6.041 or 6.431 and permission HST.730 Molecular Biology of the Auditory
of instructor System
G (Fall)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit Prereq.: 7.012 or 7.013 or 7.014 or equivalent
G (Fall)
See description under subject 6.552J. 3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
L. D. Braida
An introductory tutorial-based approach to the
auditory system. First half focuses on human
HST.718 Anatomy of Speech and
genetics and molecular biology, covering funHearing
damentals of pedigree analysis, linkage
Prereq.: 7.012 or 7.013 or 7.014 analysis, molecular cloning, and gene analysis
G (Fall) as well as ethical/legal issues, all in the con-
3-3-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit text of an auditory disorder. Second half emphasizes molecular approaches to function
The anatomical structures that are key to
speech production and hearing are presented. and dysfunction of the cochlea, and is based
on readings and discussion of research literaLaboratory exercises provide students with disture.
section experience and study of microscopic
C. C. Morton, W. F Sewell
specimens. Topics include gross anatomy of
head and neck structures, cranial nerves, and
the central nervous system. Special techniques such as chemical markers, imaging, and
electron microscopy are demonstrated.
J. C. Adams, J. B. Kobler, P. Janfaza,
B. C. Fullerton
-
G (Fall, Spring)
0-1-0 [P/D/F]
A weekly meeting to acquaint first-year students in the Speech and Hearing Sciences
wtih research opportunities. Meetings at different laboratories are hosted by faculty members of the program. These informal,
introductory visits are designed to acquaint students with the kinds of work done in each
laboratory.
N. Y. S. Kiang
HST.799 Special Topics in Speech and
Hearing
Prereq.: Permission of Instructor
G (Fall, IAP, Spring, Summer)
Units arranged [P/D/F] H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit
Assigned reading or research on special topics
in theoretical, experimental, or clinical aspects
of speech and hearing science. Arranged on individual basis with a research supervisor. At
time of registration, a project proposal is required and a concise written progress report
endorsed by the supervisor must be submitted
to the instructor in charge at the end of each
term.
W. T. Peake
Descriptions of Subjects 543
