ROTC
AS.42 Issues for Today's Military
Prereq.: AS.41
U (Spring)
3-0-3
Study of selected issues that affect the military
today. Topics include the laws of armed conflict, the military legal system, aerospace
doctrine, the military as a profession, officership, and the transition from civilian to military
life. Communication skills are emphasized.
S. Borah
AS.421 Leadership Laboratory
Prereq.: AS.41 1
U (Spring)
0-2-4 [P/D/F]
Continues AS.41 1. Includes preparation for
professional duties.
D. Gerrig
Military Science
MS.101 Introduction to the Army
Prereq.: -
MS.201 Intermediate Military Skills I MS.312 Advanced Camp Preparation
Prereq.: MS.102 or permission of instructor Prereq.: MS.311
U (Fall) U (Spring)
1-2-1 1-2-1
Develops and refines cadet technical and tacti- Prepares the Army ROTC Cadet for Summer
cal skills. Stresses oral and written communica- Advanced Camp by focusing on the specific
tions techniques. Cadets serve in a variety of subjects and events that need to be mastered
positions to develop their leadership, to successfully complete camp. Among the
managerial, and communication skills. Tactical topics covered are Patrolling, Squad Tactics,
and technical skills presented during class- Practical Land Navigation, and Tactical Radio
room instruction are applied and evaluated Communications. Cadets also participate in a
during leadership laboratories and in field train- field training exercise which emphasizes rifle
ing exercises. marksmanship, land navigation, and performA. Lewis ing on a Leadership Reaction Course.
J. Long
MS.202 Intermediate Military Skills I
MS.401 Leadership and Management I
Prereq.: MS.201 or permission of instructor
U (Spring) Prereq.: MS.302
1-2-1 U (Fall)
3-2-1
Stresses and continues the process of cadet
development. Emphasizes individual soldier Designed to develop the cadets' technical, tacskills, including first aid, map reading, and tical, and leadership skills while continually asradio communications procedures. Integrates sessing their off icership potential. Intended to
individual skills into collective tasks at the prepare the cadets for a smooth transition into
squad and platoon level. Prepares cadets for the officers' corps. Provides information on a
the rigors of leading others in a tactical environ- series of topics ranging from the United States
ment. Technical and tactical skills presented military justice system; oral and written comduring classroom instruction are applied and munications; the army's training philosophy;
U (Fall) evaluated during leadership laboratories and and command and staff functions at the small-
1-2-1 in a field training exercise. unit level, battalion and below.
A. Lewis B. Creel
Investigates the generalized structure and
employment of the US Army. Provides a
framework of leadership, management, and MS.301 Leadership and Military Science MS.402 Leadership and Management 11
communication skills to enable the first-year Prereq.: MS.202 Prereq.: MS.401
ROTC cadet to understand the responsibility U (Fall) U (Spring)
and authority vested in Army officers, and to 3-2-1 3-2-1
critically evaluate a leader's effectiveness. EmFocuses on development of cadet skills in the A continuation of the orientation initiated in
phasizes ethical considerations for leaders,
group dynamics, and the importance of verbal areas of map reading, land navigation, MS.401. Provides a basic background in the
preparation of combat orders, conducting army's logistic, supply, and personnel manageand non-verbal communication skills.
physical training, and other general military ment systems; post/installation support;
A. Lewis
subjects. military ethics and professionalism; as well as
S. Acton advanced tactical considerations dealing with
MS.102 The Fundamentals of Military threat analysis, intell/electronic warfare sysScience MS.302 Small-Unit Tactics tems, battle focus planning process, security
Prereq.: MS.101 or permission of instructor measures, and the army's program to combat
Prereq.: MS.301
U (Spring) terrorism.
1-2-1 U (Spring) B. Creel
2-0-1
Discusses interface between Active Army, National Guard, Reserves, and civilian work Addresses the leadership of small units con- MS.411 Leadership Laboratory
ducting conventional combat operations. Eleforce; interservice and intra-alliance support. Prereq.: MS.312
ments of terrain analysis and application to
Examines organization and role of company- U (Fall)
offensive, defensive, and retrogade operations
sized units; small-unit tactics and combined 1-2-1
discussed, along with weather considerations
arms concepts. Specialties of soldiers are reand their impact on combat operations. Cur- Practical exercise in the application of military
lated to operational unit missions. Introduces
rent organizations and hardware associated leadership and managerial techniques in planprinciples of war and relates them to actual historical events. with small tactical combined-arms formations ning, organizing, directing, and controlling the
reviewed. activities of the corps of cadets. Students are
A. Lewis
S. Acton assigned leaderships positions, serving in both
command and staff capacities in a standard
MS.311 Advanced Military Science battalion configuration. The primary objective
is further leadership development.
Prereq.: MS.202 or permission of instructor B. Creel
Acad Year 1996-97: U (Fall)
Acad Year 1997-98: Not offered
1-2-1 MS.412 Leadership Laboratory
Prereq.: MS.411
Continues development of cadet competenU (Spring)
cies and confidence through intermediate
3-2-1
leadership and technical/tactical instruction.
Training focuses on leadership, written and Continues MS.41 1. Includes preparation for
oral communication, operations and tactics, the transition from cadet/student to lieutenant.
land navigation, physical fitness, and general B. Creel
military subjects.
J. Long
Descriptions of Subjects 569
