School of Humanities and Social Science
Science, Technology, and
Society
For degree requirements, see listing in
Chapter VII under the School of
Humanities and Social Science.
General Undergraduate
Subjects
History of Science and
Technology
STS.001 Technology in American History
Prereq.: -
U (Spring)
3-0-9 HASS-D, Category 5
A survey of America's transition from a rural,
agrarian, and artisan society to one of the
world's leading industrial powers. Treats the
emergence of industrial capitalism: the rise of the factory system, new forms of power,
transport, and communication, the advent of
the large industrial corporation, the social relations of production, and the hallmarks of
science-based industry. Views technology as
part of the larger culture and reveals innovation as a process consisting of a range of possibilities that are chosen or rejected according
to social criteria of the time.
D. Fitzgerald
STS.002 Toward the Scientific Revolution
Prereq.: -
U (Spring)
3-0-9 HASS-D, Category 5
The emergence of Western science: the systematization of natural knowledge in the an- cient world, the transmission of the classical legacy to the Latin West, and the revolt from
classical thought during the scientific revolution. Examines scientific concepts in light of
their cultural and historical contexts.
L. E. Kay
STS.003 The Rise of Modern Science
Prereq.: -
STS.009 Military Enterprise and
Technological Change
Prereq.:
U (Fall)
3-0-9 HASS-D, Category 5
The development of major fields in the physical and life sciences, beginning with
eighteenth-century Europe and ending with
twentieth-century America. Examines ideas, institutions, and the social settings of the sciences, with emphasis on how cultural contexts
influence scientific concepts and practices.
Staff
-
U (Spring)
3-0-9 HASS
A history of the role of the military in promoting
and developing new technologies (from
medieval times to the present). Examines the
design, deployment, and diffusion of new technologies; the behavioral/social problems that
occurred with their introduction; and their influence on colonialism, industrialization, and
warfare in the modern world.
L. Trilling
Social Study of Science and
Technology
STS.01 1 American Science: Ethical
Conflicts and Political Choices
Prereq.: -
STS.012J Engineers, Scientists, and Public
Controversies
(Same subject as 2.93J)
Prereq.:
U (Fall)
3-0-9 HASS-D, Category 2
Explores the changing roles, ethical conflicts,
and public perceptions of science and scientists in American society from World War 11to
the 1990s. Studies specific historical episodes,
focusing on options, constraints, and incentives influencing responses of scientists to ethical conflicts. Examines political controversies
over the support, goals, methods, and effects of research and its applications. Topics include the atomic bomb project, space race, environmental movements, whistleblowing, biomedical research, genetic engineering, and
disputes about scientific fraud and misconduct.
Staff
-
Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: U (Spring)
3-0-9 HASS
Investigates the nature of controversies surrounding the applications of science and technology, the roles technical specialists play in
their resolution, and patterns of public participation. Students analyze the technical, social,
political, and ethical context of public controversies through case studies documented by archival videotapes, readings, and testimony of
guests. Cases include past and current local,
national, and international environmental controversies, nuclear energy and waste, community perceptions of risk, and the relations among experts, regulators, lawyers, and
citizens.
Staff
STS.019 The Profession of Engineering
Prereq.: -
STS
U (Fall)
3-0-9 HASS
Practice and dilemmas of the engineering
profession. Analyzes the role of engineers in the conception, design, manufacture, and
marketing of a sophisticated consumer
product. Studies the history of some major industries (e.g., automobile, communications,
biomedical, aerospace) in twentieth-century
US. Examines political, economic, social, and
ethical implications. May also be taken as an undergraduate seminar (three short papers).
L. Trilling
556 Chapter Vill
