Toxicology
For degree requirements, see listing in
Chapter VII under the Whitaker College.
Undergraduate Subjects
TOX.UR Undergraduate Research
Opportunities
Prereq.: -
U (Fall, Spring)
Units arranged [P/D/F]
Can be repeated for credit
Laboratory research conducted by undergraduates in the field of toxicology. May be extended over multiple terms.
P. C. Dedon, Staff
TOX.101 Special Projects in Undergraduate
Research
Prereq.: -
U (Fall)
Units arranged
Can be repeated for credit
TOX.102 Special Projects in Undergraduate
Research
Prereq.: -
U (Spring)
Units arranged
Can be repeated for credit
Emphasizes direct and active involvement of
undergraduates in laboratory research in
toxicology. May be extended over multiple
terms. Letter grade credit.
P. C. Dedon, Staff
TOX.104J Chemicals in the Environment:
Toxicology
(Same subject as 1.81J, TPP.53J)
Prereq.: 5.11, 7.012/7.013/7.014
U (Spring)
3-0-9
Chemical and biological concepts necessary to
relate environmental chemical or radiation exposure to human disease; food-, air-, and
water-borne chemicals; exposure, uptake and
distribution, metabolism, reactions with cellular
macromolecules, enzymatic repair, and cellular or genetic consequences; genotoxicity
and hormonal mimicry; development of technology for direct studies in human populations.
W. G. Thilly
TOX.105J Biotechnology and Engineering
(Same subject as 5.22J, 10.02J)
Prereq.: -
Division of Toxicology TOX
TOX
Graduate Subjects TOX.213 Genetic Toxicology
Prereq.: Permission of instructor
G (Spring)
TOX.200 Toxicology Seminar
4-0-8 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Prereq.: Open only to TOX graduate students,
The origins and existence of genetic disease
or by permission of instructor
examined from the biochemical, genetic, and
G (Fall, Spring)
public health viewpoints. DNA damage by
1-0-2 (P/D/F] H-LEVEL Grad Credit
chemicals and radiation. Molecular basis of
Weekly one-hour seminars covering graduate mutagenesis and mutational spectrometry.
student research and presentations by invited DNA repair and consequences of repair
speakers. defects. Apoptosis and genetic instability.
J. S. Wishnok, P. C. Dedon, D. B. Schauer Analysis of dose response relationships and
patterns of genetic disease in human populaTOX.201 Principles of In Vivo Toxicology tions. Harvard School of Public Health staff involved in teaching of subject.
Prereq.: Permission of instructor
W. G. Thilly, J. M. Essigmann, Staff
G (Fall)
4-3-8 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
TOX.214 Human Pathophysiology
Selected aspects of anatomy, histology, physiology, and cell biology of mammalian or- Prereq.: 5.07 and TOX.201 or permission of instructor
ganisms and their pathogens. Subject material
G (Spring)
integrated with principles of toxicology. A threehour lab/demonstration period each week invol- 3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
ves experiments in anatomy (in vivo), Mechanisms underlying selected diseases are
physiology, and microscopy to augment the examined, with particular emphasis on
lectures. molecular and biochemical basis of
J. G. Fox, D. B. Schauer, P. C. Dedon pathogenesis. The role of inflammation, the immune system, hormones, growth factors,
TOX.209 Biochemistry Laboratory drugs, toxins, and infectious agents are considered. Subject integrates aspects of pathol-
(Subject meets with 5.071J, HST.410J) ogy, physiology, biochemistry, pharmacology,
Prereq.: 5.07, and 5.310 or 5.311 and toxicology.
G (Spring) D. B. Schauer
2-8-2 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
See description under subject 5.071J. TOX.215 Epidemiology and Molecular
J. Williamson, P. Dedon Models of Disease
Prereq.: Permission of instructor
TOX.211 Metabolism of Toxic Chemicals Acad Year 1996-97: G (Fall)
Prereq.: 5.07 or 7.05 Acad Year 1997-98: Not offered
G (Spring) 4-0-11 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit The lifetime incidence and morbidity of disAnalysis of the mechanisms of action of toxic eases such as cancer, atherosclerosis, and
and carcinogenic chemicals from the perspec- other degenerative diseases are analyzed. A
tive of uptake, distribution, and metabolism. combination of these data with molecular casKey enzymatic and transport processes. Reac- cade models, especially those involving
tion mechanisms, generation of electrophiles, genetic change, is attempted. The general apand nucleophilic targets, with stress on DNA proaches of epidemiology - case control,
and proteins. Human metabolic polymor- prospective and retrospective studies - are
phisms. Methods of chemical analysis of ad- discussed in terms of new enabling analytical
ducts and metabolites. technology for human occupational and enS. R. Tannenbaum, P. C. Dedon vironmental studies.
W. G. Thilly, G. N. Wogan, S. R. Tannenbaum
U (Spring)
4-0-5
See description under subject 5.22J.
J. M. Essigmann, R. S. Langer
Descriptions of Subjects 563
