Program in Media Arts and Sciences MAS
Media Arts and Sciences
For degree requirements, see listing in
Chapter VII under the School of
Architecture and Planning.
Undergraduate Subjects
MAS.UR Undergraduate Research in Media
Arts and Sciences
Prereq.: -
U (Fall, Spring, Summer)
Units arranged [P/D/F]
Can be repeated for credit
MAS.URG Undergraduate Research in
Media Arts and Sciences
Prereq.: -
U (Fall, Spring, Summer)
Units arranged
Can be repeated for credit
Individual or group study, research, or
laboratory investigations under faculty supervision, including individual participation in an
ongoing research project. See UROP coordinator for further information.
C. Schmandt
MAS.100 Introduction to Media Arts and
Sciences
Prereq.: -
U (Spring)
3-0-3
Examines new technologies and applications
in information and entertainment, perceptual
computing, learning and common sense. Explores the convergence of computing, communications, and consumer electronics, with
emphasis on the human interface, machine intelligence, and personalized media. Includes introductions to holography, computer graphics,
interactive cinema, electronic music, digital
television, machine vision, speech processing,
interface agents, and interface physics. Large
lecture format accompanied by team research
projects on world activities in these areas.
N. P. Negroponte
MAS.123 Tools for Thought
Prereq.: -
MAS.124 Intentionality
(New)
Prereq.:
U (Spring)
3-3-6
Examines how technological tools support new
ways of thinking and learning. Considers the
role of toys, microworlds, "intelligent" tutors,
and virtual communities in the learning
process. Emphasizes the use of artifacts as
representational and expressive aids for learning, problem-solving, and communication. Students explore tools-to-think with, analyze
them, and design new ones.
M. Resnick, M. Brand, J. Cassell
-
U (Spring)
2-4-6
Often it is not what is said, but what one does
that communicates one's intentions. Facial expressions, body or hand movements, gaze,
tone of voice, pauses, or other sounds are examples. Similarly, the intentions of a group are
read from the patterns of individual interactions and movements. Subject explores the
basic forms of expressing intentionality both in
individual and group settings, in both humans
and other animals. Projects show how correct
recognition and interpretation of intentional
acts may be recovered, using situations such
as conversation, strolling down the street, driving, dance (including animal behaviors), and
sports such as soccer or football.
A. Pentland, W. Richards
MAS.134 Story: Representation and
Process
Prereq.: 6.001, MAS 100
U (Fall)
3-3-6
Principles of narrative and presentation taught
in a studio context. Expression in multiple
media. Design and analysis of representation
of media content and narrative structure. Basic
techniques of visual design, video storytelling,
information retrieval, and personalization.
Class requirements include readings and a
series of group and individual projects in
several different media. Limited enrollment.
G. Davenport, K. Haase
MAS.142 Performance
Prereq.: -
MAS
MAS.160 Signals, Systems, and Information
for Media Technology
(Subject meets with MAS.510)
Prereq.: 18.02
U (Fall)
4-0-8
Fundamentals of signals, systems, and information theory with emphasis on modeling both
the audio/visual message and the human
recipient. Linear systems, difference equations, Z-transforms, sampling and sampling
rate conversion, convolution, filtering, modulation, Fourier analysis, entropy, noise,
Shannon's fundamental theorems. Additional
topics may include data compression, filter
design, and feature detection. Meets with
graduate subject MAS.51 0, but assignments
differ.
V. M. Bove, Jr., R. W. Picard
Perceptual Computing
MAS.210 High-Level Computer Vision:
Methods and Models
(Subject meets with MAS.624)
Prereq.: 6.801 or permission of instructor
Acad Year 1996-97: U (Spring)
Acad Year 1997-98: Not offered
3-0-9
Addresses high-level computer vision issues
such as geometric reconstruction, vision for
autonomous navigation, recognition, scene
labeling, and scene monitoring. Consideration
of vision as an inference problem where the
system is attempting to make decisions about
the scene. Second half emphasizes image sequences where variation over time is imporU (Fall)
tant. Focus is on both the fundamental
2-4-6 research problems addressed as well as the
Introduction to interactive performance sys- specific mathematical and artificial intelligence
tems in a variety of media (with emphasis on techniques applied. Meets with graduate submusic), from the theoretical, interface, and ject MAS.624, but assignments differ.
creative expression points of view. Subject A. Bobick, Staff
covers real-time control issues, unobtrusive
monitoring of physical gesture and human MAS.234J Cognitive Architectures
voice, intelligent interpretation of human ex-
(Same subject as 9.34J, MAS.654)
pressive intention, and mapping of user control
Prereq.: 9.62 or 9.00
to performance results. Class projects include
U (Fall)
systems that demand various types and levels
3-0-6
of skill in interactive environments that support
collaboration and collective performance. Final See description under subject 9.34J.
project is an interactive performance, designed W. A. Richards
and created by groups of students.
T. Machover
Descriptions of Subjects 545
